Title: 2604.18160v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18160v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:24:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
1

Programmable recirculating  bricks  mesh architecture for  photonic  neural networks 

Jacek Gosciniak 

Institute of Microelectronics and Optoelectronics, Warsaw University of Technology, 

Koszykowa 75 st., Warsaw 00 -662, Poland 

Email:  jacek.gosciniak@pw.edu.pl 

Abstract 

General -purpose programmable photonic processors are considered a crucial technology because they 

combine the ultra -high speed, massive bandwidth, and energy efficiency of light -based computing with 

the flexibility of software -defined hardware. Unlike appl ication -specific photonic circuits (ASPICs) 

designed for one task, these processors use reconfigurable waveguide meshes to implement various 

functions —such as switching, filtering, or AI computation —on a single chip, allowing for rapid 

prototyping and vers atile, on -demand hardware redefinition. 

Here  we report  a recirculating  “bricks ” mesh architecture that  can be easily implemented in photonic 

neural networks.  It will be shown that a single programmable optical system is capable of performing 

various functions depending on the requirements.  In particular, we will show that the same network, 

after being reprogrammed, can perform many different functions, ranging from a crossbar network to 

optical  interference circuits with variable structures, which can then be subjected to Singular Value 

Decomposition.  Furthermore, the "bricks" mesh serves as an excellent foundation for implementing a 

monitoring system capable of monitoring the power in each location of the circuit and subsequently 

self -calibrating  and stabilizing  the circuit using a feedback loop. 

Introduction 

Neural networks  (NNs ) are computing models inspired by the structure of a biological brain that are 

trained on input data to implement complex signal processing tasks  [1, 2]. However, the energy 

required for training doubles every 5 months, necessitating the development of more energy -efficient 

hardware for NNs  [3].

To address this problem, programmable photonic neural networks (PNNs) have been proposed  [4-9] as 

a promising, scalable, and mass manufacturable integrated photonic hardware solution  which 

significantly  accelerates  the most expensive , but also the most fundamental mathematical operation 

in a PNN: unitary matrix -vector multiplication (MVM).  Such  operations can be performed at the speed 

of light and with minimal power consumption , thus, represent a promising  fu ll y optical computing 

paradigm. 

The main factor limiting the performance of programmable photonic circuits is the phase shifter  that 

cannot be scaled down arbitrarily as it is subject to trade -off between loss, footprint, power, speed, 

and many other factors.  One way to avoid this trade -off is to find an architecture that minimizes the 

average phase shift per element in a large circuit. Essentially, this means that each switch should be 

able to operate with only a fraction  𝑂 (1/𝑁 ) of the phase shifters active at any given time  [10 ]. The  first 

solution to this problem relies on the implementation of a crossbar network architecture  [11-14]. The 

second solution, in our opinion, is based on the implementation of recirculating networks  [7-9, 15 ] in 

which signal transmission is not limited to a single direction , usually from left to right,  as in feed -forward 

networks, but  it  can propagate in any direction, including backward. Thanks to these new capabilities, 

recirculating networks enable a significant reduction in the number of switches in the system while 

maintaining all signal processing capabilities. 2

Furthermore, one of the main challenges in photonic information processing, especially in a 

deterministic quantum information processing, is to realize key transformations on time scales shorter 

than decoherence time  [16 ] and loss mechanism  [15 , 17 ]. This can be realized through an architecture -

based approach using the recirculating photonic networks that minimize the duration of information 

processing tasks through dynamic control of  multi -photon interactions. It has been shown that 

recirculating photonic networks may provide significant improvements in time and hardware efficiency 

relative to state -of -the -art architectures based on neural networks [ 16 ]. 

Among recirculating networks, one in particular —based on the so -called  recirculating  “bricks” mesh 

architecture  (or shifted rectangular mesh architecture) —deserves special attention due to its 

significant similarity to feed -forward networks  [15, 17, 18 ].

Recirculating “bricks” mesh architecture 

The recirculating “bricks” mesh architecture  consists of from 2 to 4 MZIs in a unit cell compared to 6 

for a hexagonal mesh  which result in  a significant reduction in the optical path length and, thus, the 

propagation losses  [15 ]. Simultaneously, it yields a more efficient 3 -point interconnection scheme 

compared to a regular square mesh architecture where each unit cell is connected through 4 points. 

The ability for signal flow in any direction enables the implementation of both control loops and various 

types of filters, including both infinite impulse response (IIR) filters, which are based on ring resonators 

(RRs) , and finite impulse response (FIR) filters, which are based on asymmetric MZIs.  This significantly 

exceeds the capab ilities of feed -forward networks, enabling the implementation of more complex 

systems  [15, 17, 18 ].

The reconfiguration performance of the “bricks” mesh, defined as the number of filters with different 

frequency separation values for the RR -based filter, amounts to 11 for only 25 MZIs. In comparison, for 

a hexagonal  and triangular mesh  with  the same number of MZIs, it was calculated at 9 and 6, 

respectively, while for a regular square mesh, it was calculated at 6  [15 ]. Simultaneousl y, the 

reconfiguration performance for the MZI -based  filter  arranged in the  “bricks ” mesh  architecture 

exceeds 12  which is  exactly the same as  the performance  of  the hexagonal mesh . In comparison, f or a 

triangular mesh  it was calculated at 8, while for a regular square mesh  at 6  [15 ]. As observed from 

above, the  “bricks ” mesh  architecture  doubles the performance compared to a regular square mesh 

architecture.  This is yet another undeniable advantage of an architecture built on a “bricks” mesh.   

> Figure 1.The photonic chip with a programmable mesh core connected to control electronics, optical fibers,
> filters, high -speed modulators and detectors and many other components.

Previous studies have shown  [17 ] that the optical depth of a network based on the “bricks” mesh 

architecture is significantly reduced compared to feed -forward networks, both  based on  rectangular 3

and triangular  meshes , and the number of active MZIs required to perform  any linear transformation 

between input and output modes  is reduced by more than a factor of 13.  Furthermore,  all  ports that 

can function as both input and output ports are located on all four sides of the mesh  structure  [17 ].

This enables the implementation of systems that are not achievable with feed -forward networks. 

Simultaneously,  however,  the recirculating “bricks” mesh architecture closely resembles feed -forward 

networks, which enables the implementation of all tasks possible for this type of network.  Additionally ,

the  ne xt  advantage of this mesh is that it can be configured for various tasks  such  as,  for example , the 

Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)  and  can be  implemented in different types of network 

architectures  such  as,  for  example,  the crossbar network .

Crossbar  architecture  with recirculating  “bri cks ” mesh 

One such network is a crossbar network  [11 -14 ]. Crossbar networks are one of the  most exciting AI 

hardware architectures  to construct a photonic matri x multiplier of a given number of input and output 

dimensions  able to achieve parallelism and analog computing at the same time . It typically aligns 

incoming signals along one direction (i.e., left -right) and outgoing signals along the other direction (top -

down). The crossbar network consists of  𝑁  input and  𝑀  output ports with  𝑁  × 𝑀  connections, allowing 

for all -to -all connectivity at the cost of  𝑁  × 𝑀  reconfigurable coupling elements .

In this paper, the crossbar network is constructed of the MZI mesh that  uses  collections of MZIs as a 

linear  optical  interference  unit (O IU)  that can perform calculations through their transfer matrices . An 

example provided in this paper consist of an  𝑁  × 𝑀  arbitrary unitary matri x that consists of MZIs 

arranged in recirculating “bricks” mesh topology. Compared to standard feed -forward mesh topologies 

where the total number of MZI units for  𝑁  × 𝑁  matrix is exactly  𝑁 (𝑁  − 1)/2, i.e., consist of  𝑂 (𝑁 2)

parameters (2 phase shifters)  [19, 20 ], in the recirculating “bricks” mesh topology the total number of 

MZI units  scales with  𝑁  which represents a significant reduction in the number of  MZIs  required to 

perform the relevant logical operations  [15 ].

The output from each column  𝑧 𝑗  is described by McCulloch -Pitts neuron model  [21 ] and is expressed 

as 

𝑧 𝑗  = 𝜎 𝑖  (∑ 𝑤 𝑖𝑗  𝑥 𝑖 )

where  𝑧 𝑗  is the output vector from the  jth  line made of  𝑀  outputs,  𝜎  is an activation (nonlinear) 

function,  𝑥 𝑖  is the  ith  element of the input vector  𝑋  with  𝑁  elements and  𝑤 𝑖𝑗  is the  𝑁  × 𝑀  weight 

matrix for the input value  𝑥 𝑖 . The linear term  𝑦 𝑗  = ∑ 𝑤 𝑖𝑗  𝑥 𝑖  represents the weighted addition while the 

nonlinear part comprises the activation function  𝜎 .4   

> Figure 2.The proposed crossbar network based on a “bricks” mesh architecture.

The optical data signal vector  𝑋  = [𝑥 1, 𝑥 2, … , 𝑥 𝑛 ]𝑇  enters the crossbar array via  i-th  row and then each 

signal is  weighted accordingly using phase shifters implemented in a symmetric MZI  (modulated 

through a phase shifter ) (Fig. 2 ). Each two adjacent signals  𝑥 𝑛 −1 and  𝑥 𝑛  are then combined via a 3 dB 

beam splitter. Depending on the phase shifts on two signals, the resulting signal is split in vertical 

direction, up  or  down . In the next 3 dB splitter the optical signal is split  again , so that the part of the 

column signal gets coupled to the row route while the remaining part of the column signal continues 

its vertical route along the column until reaching the next beam splitter.  The columns consist of 

intensity modulators which are responsible for signal activation.  After the next two beam splitters the 

signal will be split again into a portion entering the 2 nd  row and a portion that gets forwarded to its 3 rd 

row.  Eac h time a signal is routed to the appropriate  column , it is activated using an activation function .

This process is repeated multiple times until reaching the final column.  The output signals  𝑧 𝑗  at each 

column correspond to the inner product between the input vector  𝑥 𝑖  and the respective weights  𝑤 𝑖𝑗 .

Thus, i n each column  a signal is weighted, summated and then activated. 

Depending on the requirements, all  activation function units  can be deactivated , with the exception of 

the last ones in each column. Deactivation at this point applies to the settings of the intensity 

modulators corresponding to maximum signal transmission. Consequently, only the last intensity 

modulators in each column can function  as active activation function units  (Fig. 2 ). In this way, all signals 5

reaching a given column from successive rows will be summed, and only after being completely 

summed  they will be subjected to the activation function. 

In other scenario  (Fig.  2) the activation function is activate d every time an additional signal is added to 

the output  column  signal. Thus, the first weighted addition is followed by a nonlinear activation, after 

which another weighted addition occurs in response to the next signal, followed by another nonlinear 

activation. This happens every time a signal from the  successive  row is added to the output signal  𝑧 .

Singular Value Decomposition  with recirculating “bricks” mesh 

As can be seen from the above discussion,  the  photonic  neural network ( PNN) is composed of two 

essential blocks: an optical interference unit (OIU) that implements optical matrix multiplication and 

separated nonlinear optical function unit (NOFU) that implements the nonlinear activation [ 22 ].  The 

OIU provides an opportunity to process optical  signals, which contain information in amplitude and 

phase,  directly within network while bypassing slow optical -to -electronic conversion. The linear 

transformations are realized by computing matrix -vector products through an interference in a MZI 

mesh  that consist of  𝑁  input and output mode. The OIU consists of a cascade of  𝑁  layers, such as binary 

tree layers ( Fig.  3) or diagonal lines ( Fig.  4) (resulting in a triangular mesh), all constructed from  2 × 2

programmable interferometer blocks implemented using integrated MZIs.  The fundamental function 

of the MZI is to be able  to  minimize to zero  a power in either of its  output powers given any input 

vector.  These layers  may  then learn a decomposition of the corresponding  transformation  matrix  via a 

sequential,  layer -by -layer power optimization method relying on measurement and feedback  [18,  22, 

23 ].

In this arrangement, double unitary matri x modulations and a diagonal matri x modulation are deployed 

for arbitrary matri x modulation  since an arbitrary matrix could be decomposed to the multiplication of 

a unitary matrix, a diagonal matrix, and another unitary matrix through singular value decomposition 

(SVD) .      

> Figure 3.Binary tre elayers of Mach -Zehnder interferometers ( MZIs )that may serve for layer -by -layer power
> optimization.

6

Figure  4. Diag onal line  layers  of Mach -Zehnder interferometers (MZIs)  that  may serve for layer -by -layer power 

optimization. 

Such full MZI is made from two phase shifters  𝜙 1, 𝜙 2 and two 50:50 beam splitters.  The 50:50 beam 

splitter can be represented by a matrix 

𝑈 𝐵𝑆  = 1

√2 [1 𝑖 

𝑖  1] (1)

while the phase -shifter by a matrix 

𝑈 𝑃𝑆  = [𝑒 𝑖𝜙  0

0 1] (2)

Thus, the transfer function of the full symmetric MZI (sMZI) (BS -MZI -BS) is expressed as 

𝑈 𝑠𝑀𝑍𝐼  = 𝑈 𝐵𝑆  [𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 1 0

0 𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 2 ] 𝑈 𝐵𝑆  = 1

2 [ 𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 1 − 𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 2 𝑖 (𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 1 + 𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 2 )

𝑖 (𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 1 + 𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 2 ) −𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 1 + 𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 2 ]

= 𝑖 𝑒 𝑖 (𝜙 1+𝜙 2  

> 2)

[

𝑠𝑖𝑛  (𝜙 1 − 𝜙 2

2 ) 𝑐𝑜𝑠  (𝜙 1 − 𝜙 2

2 )

𝑐𝑜𝑠  (𝜙 1 − 𝜙 2

2 ) −𝑠𝑖𝑛  (𝜙 1 − 𝜙 2

2 )

] (3)

In comparison, the transfer function of the full asymmetric MZI (aMZI) (BS -MZI -BS -MZI) is expressed as 

𝑈 𝑎𝑀𝑍𝐼  = 1

2 𝑈 𝐵𝑆  [𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 2 0

0 1] 𝑈 𝐵𝑆  [𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 1 0

0 1] = 𝑖 𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 2 

> 2

[

𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 1 𝑠𝑖𝑛  (𝜙 2

2 ) 𝑐𝑜𝑠  (𝜙 2

2 )

𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 1 𝑐𝑜𝑠  (𝜙 2

2 ) −𝑠𝑖𝑛  (𝜙 2

2 )

] (4)

Here, the MZI is implemented with two internal and no external phase shifters, thus, it is called a 

symmetric MZI (sMZI). This type of sMZI is attractive because it is more compact without the need for 

an external phase -shifter, which can account for a sig nificant fraction of the length of the circuit. A 

shorter structure not only occupies less area on a chip but also suffers from less propagation losses 

what is especially important in photonic neural networks (PNN s). 7

The OIU can implement any real -valued matrix  𝑊  that may be decomposed as  𝑊  = 𝑈 Σ𝑉 † through 

singular value decomposition (SVD), where  𝑈  is a unitary matrix,  Σ is a rectangular diagonal matrix  with 

non -negative real numbers on the diagonal and  𝑉 † is the complex conjugate of the unitary matrix  𝑉 .

As  it  has been previously shown, any unitary transformations  𝑈  and  𝑉 † can be implemented with phase 

shifters and optical beam splitters. In comparison,  Σ can be implemented using optical attenuators [ 24 ]. 

In consequence, the implementation of matrix multiplication with unitary matrices consumes no power 

[22 ], which  enables the extreme energy efficiency of the ONN  architectures, especially taking into 

account that major proportion o f ANN calculations involve matrix products [ 22 ]. 

In a standard photonic arrangement, the  NOFU  can be implemented through an additional photonic 

layer [ 22 ], however, i n a proposed recirculating “bricks” mesh architecture , the N OF U can  be 

implemented  through  any  vertical lines as shown in  Fig.  3 and  4 (shadowed green region) using optical 

nonlinearities such as saturable absorption  [4] and bistability [ 25 ].  This is an undeniable advantage of 

the proposed system, as it eliminates the need to implement additional layers, thereby reducing the 

system’s footprint. Additionally, the system is programmable in real time and can perform a variety of 

functions dependin g on current needs  [26 -28].

An operation principle for those two arrangements is similar to a previously  discussed  crossbar 

network. The optical signal  vector  𝑋  = [𝑥 1, 𝑥 2, … , 𝑥 𝑛 ]𝑇  is splitted equally between all MZI modulators 

each of which encode an element of  𝑥 𝑖  into amplitude and phase. Then, a  programmable  MZI mesh 

performs  transformation 

𝑦 𝑖  

> 1

= 𝑊 1𝑥 𝑖 

> 1

through optical interference. At the end of  layer,  the  signals enter the  programmable NOFU  that  applies 

the activation function  𝜎  to yield the input to the next layer.  As previously noted, NOFU can be 

implemented as an additional layer separating successive OIUs, or through the vertical elements shown 

in  Fig.  3 and  4 (shadowed green area) . Depending on the system's characteristics, a PNN may consist 

of a large number of both OIUs and NOFUs  which may implement additional transformations 

𝑦 𝑖  

> 𝑛

= 𝜎 (𝑊 𝑛 𝑥 𝑖 

> 𝑛

)

As observed,  interference  and thus processing take place entirely in the optical domain without 

assistance of electronics. 

Sel f-configuration and stabilization 

Another advantage of a proposed recirculating “bricks” mesh architecture is its compatibility with a 

recently proposed monitoring system that can monitor a signal flow in each part of the circuit  under 

operation  [18 ]. Furthermore , it can perform a control strategy to automatically adjust the optical power 

and phase of photonic components at each point of the photonic system with extreme accuracy and 

minimal insertion loss. The technique is based on a feedback control loop that sim ultaneously adjusts 

the matrix coefficient of the device transfer function and compensates for process tolerances and 

thermal drift in real time. This control strategy relies on the Wheatstone bridge arrangement with a 

calibration -free feedback loop that d oes not require prior knowledge of the device transfer function 

[18 ].

As all bridge components are located on the same chip in close proximity to each other, the system 

exhibits minimal sensitivity to changes in the temperature of the photonic components situated on the 

chip. Therefore, the only factor affecting the temperat ure change of the component under test is the 

optical power propagating through this section of the waveguide . Furthermore, unlike most monitors 

and photodetectors, which provide an electrical current upon measuring an optical signal, the 8

proposed arrangement provides a voltage  [18 ]. This eliminates the need for current -to -voltage 

conversion at a later stage, thereby streamlining the circuit and  substantially reducing noise leve l.         

> Figure 5.A schematic view of the local fe edback with the monitoring module and with the actuators placed
> either in a preceding or succe eding part of the system.

The  system can be  self -calibrated  using  feedback loops  with voltage applied to  both  preceding and 

succeeding  actuators , depending on the requirements,  to stabilize  the circuit at the desired value 

defined by  the target voltage  in a processing unit  [Fig. 5 ] [18 ]. Furthermore,  the monitoring system can 

be implemented  to  self -configure  entire layers , for example  binary tree layers and /or  diagonal lines 

[23 ], as presented in  Fig.  3 and  4, which  significantly expands the range of  available  design 

arrangements. 

The system can be built based on the transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) that are characterized by 

the epsilon -near -zero (ENZ) point whose properties can be actively modified by the external voltage 

[29-31 ]. 

Summary 

Recirculating meshes,  an d in  particular  “bricks” mesh , are capable of providing significant benefits in 

many key technologies, including photonic neural networks, primarily due to their scalability, high 

reconfigurability, and lower optical losses compared to traditional, large -scale static photonic circuits .

Instead of building a massive, one -way interferometer, a recirculating mesh allows photons to pass 

through a smaller, programmable, and tunable component multiple times to simulate a larger, complex 

unitary transformation.  This enables the realization of key transformations on time scales shorter than 

the decoherence time  and the loss mechanism . Furthermore, they  are capable of minimizing the 

duration of information processing tasks through dynamic control of multi -photon interactions . It has 

been shown  that  such networks  may provide significant improvements in time and hardware efficiency 

relative to state -of -the -art architectures based on neural networks . These advantages make “bricks” 

mesh designs a very promising technology for implementing practical, near -term, large -scale quantum 

signal processing  and neural  networks. 

Acknowledgement 

The author  is very thankful to Prof. D. G. Misiek for his support and very valuable suggestions. 9

Reference 

1.  A.  Mehonic,  A. J.  Kenyon,  “Brain -inspired computing needs a master plan ,” Nature  604,  255 –260 

(2022). 

2.  D.  Kudithipudi,  et  al. , “Neuromorphic computing at scale ,”  Nature  637, 801 –812 (2025). 

3.  J. Sevilla, L. Heim, A. Ho, T. Besiroglu, M. Hobbhahn, P. Villalobos, “Compute Trends Across Three 

Eras of Machine Learning” in 2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 

Padua, Italy , pp. 1 –8 (2022) .

4.  R. Hamerly,  L.  Bernstei,  A.  Sludds,  M.  Soljačić,  D.  Englund,  “Large -scale optical neural networks 

based on photoelectric multiplication ,”  Phys. Rev. X  9, 021032 (2019). 

5.  S. Bandyopadhyay , R. Hamerly , A. Sludds , N. Harris , S. Krastanov, D . Bunandar, M . Streshinsky, M .

Hochberg , D. Englund , “ Single -chip photonic deep neural network with forward -only training ,”  Nat. 

Photonics  18, 1335 -1343 (2024). 

6.  F. Ashtiani, M. H. Idjadi, K . Kim,  “Integrated photonic neural network with on -chip backpropagation 

training,”  Nature  651, 927 –932 (2026) .

7.  W. Bogaerts, D. Pérez, J. Capmany, D. A. B. Miller, J. Poon, D. Englund, F. Morichetti, A. Melloni, 

“Programmable  photonic circuits,”  Nature  586 (7828), 207 -216 (2020). 

8.  D. Perez, I. Gasulla, J. Capmany, “Field -programmable  photonic arrays,”  Opt. Express  26 (21), 

27265 –27278 (2018). 

9.  T. Dai, A. Ma, J. Mao, Y. Ao, X. Jia, Y. Zheng, CH.  Zhai, Y. Yang, Z. Li, B. Tang, J. Luo, B.  Zhang, X. Hu, 

A. Gong, I. Wang, “A  programmable  topological photonic chip,”  Nat. Materials  23, 928 –936 (2024). 

10.  R. Hamerly, J . R. Basani, A . Sludds, S . K. Vadlamani, D . Englund , “ Toward the information -theoretic 

limit  of  programmable  photonics ,”  APL Photon.  10, 110803 (2025). 

11.  B. Do ng et al.,  “Partial coherence enhances parallelized  photonic computing ,” Nature  632,  55 –62 

(2024) .

12.  J. Feldmann, N. Youngblood , M. Karpov, H. Gehring, X. Li, M. Stappers, M. Le Gallo, X. Fu, A. 

Lukashchuk, A. S. Raja, J. Liu, C. D. Wright, A. Sebastian, T. J. Kippenberg, W. H. P. Pernice , H. 

Bhaskaran , “Parallel convolutional processing using an integrated photonic tensor core ,” Nature 

589,  52 –58 (2021) .

13.  G. Giamougiannis,  A. Tsakyridis, Y . Ma, A . Totović, M . Moralis -Pegios, D . Lazovsky, N . Pleros , “ A

coherent photonic crossbar for scalable universal linear optics ,”  J. Lightwave Technol.  41 (8), 2425 -

2442  (2023). 

14.  S. Kovaios, I . Roumpos, A . Tsakyridis, M . Moralis -Pegios, D . Lazovsky, K . Vyrsokinos, N . Pleros , “ On -

chip 1 TOPS Hyperdimensional Photonic Tensor Core using a WDM Silicon Photonic Coherent 

Crossbar ,”  J. Lightwave Technol.  43  (18 ), 8799  - 8805  (2025) .

15.  J. Gosciniak, “Shifted rectangular mesh architecture for programmable photonics,”  arXiv ,

arXiv:2510.17307 (2025 ). 

16.  E. Grovn, M . Bundgaard -Nielsen, J . Mork, D . Englund, M . Heuck , “ Recirculating Quantum Photonic 

Networks for Fast Deterministic Quantum Information Processing ,”  arXiv , arXiv:2602.11033  (2026). 

17.  J. Gosciniak, “ Programmable recirculating bricks mesh architecture for quantum photonics ,”  arXiv ,

arXiv:2604.01369  (2026). 

18.  J. Gosciniak, “Automated control strategy for setting and stabilization of photonic circuits,“  arXiv ,

arXiv:2510.22737 (2025). 

19.  W. R. Clements, P. C. Humphreys, B. J. Metcalf, W. S. Kolthammer, I. A. Walmsley, “Optimal design 

for universal multiport interferometers,”  Optica  3 (12), 1460 -1465 (2016) .

20.  B. A. Bell, I. A. Walmsley, “Further compactifying linear optical unitaries,”  APL Photon.  6, 070804 

(2021). 10 

21.  W. S.  McCulloch,  W.  Pitts,  “A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity ,” The bulletin 

of mathematical biophysics, 5  (4), 115 -133  (1943). 

22.  Y. Shen, N . C. Harris, S . Skirlo, M . Prabhu, T . Baehr -Jones, M . Hochberg, X . Sun, S . Zhao, H .

Larochelle, D . Englund , M. Solja cic,  “Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits ,” Na t. 

Photonics  11,  441 –446 (2017) .

23.  Ch . Roques -Carmes , S. Fan , D. A. B. Miller , “Measuring, processing, and generating partially 

coherent light with self -configuring optics ,” Light Sci . Appl . 13, 260 (2024). 

24.  Z. Xu, T. Zhou, M. Ma, Ch.  Deng, Q . Dai2,  L.  Fang , “ Large -scale photonic chiplet Taichi empowers 

160 -TOPS/W artificial general intelligence,”  Science  384 (6692), 202 -209 (2024). 

25.  J. Gosciniak, Z. Hu, M. Thomaschewski, V. J. Sorger, J. B. Khurgin, “Bistable all-optical devices based 

on nonlinear epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) materials,”  Laser Photonics Rev.  17 (4), 2200723 (2023). 

26.  S. Pai, Z . Sun, T . W. Hughes2, T . Park,  B. Bartlett2, I . A. D. Williamson,  M. Minkov, M . Milanizadeh, 

N. Abebe, F . Morichetti, A . Melloni,  S. Fan, O . Solgaard, D . A. B. Miller , “Experimentally realized in 

situ backpropagation for deep learning in photonic neural networks,”  Science  380 (6643), 398 -404 

(2023). 

27.  S. R.  Ahmed  et al. , “Universal photonic artificial intelligence acceleration ,” Nature  640, 368 –374 

(2025). 

28.  T. W. H ughes , M . Minkov , Y . Shi , S . Fan, “ Training of photonic neural networks through  in situ 

backpropagation and gradient measurement ,”  Optica  5 (7), 864 -871 (2018). 

29.  J. Gosciniak, “Integrated Bolometric Photodetectors Based on Transparent Conductive Oxides from 

Near-to Mid-Infrared Wavelengths,”  Adv. Photonics Res.  5 (2), 2300261 (2024). 

30.  J. Gosciniak, J. B. Khurgin, “Transparent conductive oxides as a material platform for a realization 

of all -optical photonic neural networks,”  Sci. Rep.  15, 24977 (2025). 

31.  J. Gosciniak, J. B. Khurgin , ”Schottky photodetectors with transparent conductive oxides for 

photonic integrated circuits,”  ACS Photonics  11 (3), 1137 -1146 (2024).