Title: Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.24812v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:18:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 

JONAS REGEHR, MITCH BRILES, ZACHARY TATLOCK, and PAVEL PANCHEKHA 

Numerical software depends on fast, accurate implementations of mathematical primitives like sin , exp , and 

log . Modern superoptimizers can optimize floating-point kernels against a given set of such primitives, but a more fundamental question remains open: which new primitives are worth implementing in the first place? We formulate this as numerical library learning : given a workload of floating-point kernels, identify the mathematical primitives whose expert implementations would most improve speed and accuracy. Our key insight is that numerical superoptimizers already have the machinery well-suited to this problem. Their search procedures happen to enumerate candidate primitives, their equivalence procedures can generalize and deduplicate candidates, and their cost models can estimate counterfactual utility : how much the workload would improve if a given primitive were available. We present GrowLibm , which repurposes the Herbie superoptimizer as a numerical library learner. 

GrowLibm mines candidate primitives from the superoptimizer’s intermediate search results, ranks them by counterfactual utility, and prunes redundant candidates. Across three scientific applications (PROJ, CoolProp, and Basilisk), GrowLibm identifies compact, reusable primitives that can be implemented effectively using standard numerical techniques. When Herbie is extended with these expert implementations, kernel speed improves by up to 2.2× at fixed accuracy, and maximum achievable accuracy also improves, in one case from 56 .0% to 93 .5% . We also prototype an LLVM matcher that recognizes learned primitives in optimized IR, recovering 26 replacement sites across five PROJ projections and demonstrating measurable effects on both end-to-end speed and accuracy. 

ACM Reference Format: 

Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha. 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning. 1, 1 (March 2026), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn 

1 Introduction 

Maps and navigation, physical simulation, engineering CAD—computation in these increasingly important fields relies on short floating-point kernels whose speed and accuracy shape application behavior. Those kernels, in turn, are built from the mathematical primitives available on the target platform. These primitives include basic arithmetic operators as well as elementary functions provided by system math libraries like sin , exp , and log . They might also include third-party libraries like GSL, or even application-specific library functions written by experts. Floating-point kernels then compose these primitives into higher-level mathematical operations while taking care to ensure both speed and accuracy. In fact, the programming languages community has spent over a decade developing tooling to support this task. Modern numerical superoptimizers like Herbie [ 40 ], for example, can increasingly optimize kernels against a given set of available primitives [ 45 ], even scaling the results to real-world applications like the LULESH hydrodynamics application [ 44 ]. Modern verification tools like Satire [ 13 ] make it possible to statically verify these implementations, given error models for those primitives. And modern precision tuners like FPTuner [8] and POP [3] can even optimize kernels 

Authors’ Contact Information: Jonas Regehr; Mitch Briles; Zachary Tatlock; Pavel Panchekha. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM XXXX-XXXX/2026/3-ART https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.  

> arXiv:2603.24812v1 [cs.PL] 25 Mar 2026 2Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha

to leverage mixed precision. Designing a particular floating-point kernel against a particular set of primitives is increasingly well supported. This only raises the question: which new primitives are worth building? Some primitives, like 

sin or matrix multiplication, are so widely used that implementation justifies itself. But how should library authors prioritize the zoo of mathematical functions found across fields as diverse as geospa-tial projections, Helmholtz energy formulations, astrodynamics, and more? How do library authors determine which primitives are most common, and most important, to their particular domain? We call this problem numerical library learning : given an application and a representative workload, identify mathematical primitives whose specialized implementations would most improve the application’s speed/accuracy tradeoff. Numerics are an especially attractive setting because primitives are small, pure expressions, while their implementations can range widely, covering algebraic identities, multi-word arithmetic, approximations of various types, digit recurrences, and even hardware-aware tuning. In other words, primitives are easy to characterize but require expertise to implement well. Numerical library learning, then, prioritizes that expertise. Our key insight is that numerical superoptimizers already have the machinery of library learners. Their search procedures enumerate plausible primitives, their equivalence procedures identify different presentations of the same latent function, and their error and cost models answer the question library designers actually care about: if this primitive existed, where would it be used, and how much would it help? We present GrowLibm , a numerical library learner that uses a numerical superoptimizer “in reverse”: instead of optimizing a kernel against a fixed set of primitives, it asks which new primitives would improve many kernels at once. GrowLibm mines candidate primitives from the superop-timizer’s own search space, semantically deduplicates and generalizes them, and ranks them by 

counterfactual utility : how much the workload would improve if the primitive were available. Intuitively, GrowLibm favors candidates that are frequent, small, yet still hard for a superoptimizer to optimize on its own. The result is a short list at the right scope for expert attention: compact, reusable primitives that recur across kernels and unlock better implementations. We evaluate GrowLibm on three substantial scientific applications: cartographic projections in PROJ [ 43 ], thermophysical property computations in CoolProp [ 2], and astrodynamics kernels in Basilisk [ 26 ]. Across these applications, GrowLibm proposes compact domain-specific primitives that a numerical expert can implement effectively. When implemented well, many of these primitives are reused in optimized kernels and expand the speed/accuracy frontier, with speed-ups of up to 

2.2× compared to similarly-optimized kernels without access to GrowLibm -suggested primitives. The new primitives also enable higher accuracy than previously possible, with one kernel in PROJ going from 56 .0% to 93 .5% accurate thanks to its use of 2 GrowLibm -suggested primitives. We also prototype an LLVM matcher that recognizes learned primitives in optimized LLVM IR, recovering 26 replacement sites across five PROJ projections. Some projections are both faster (by up to 5% )and more accurate; others trade modest slowdowns for substantially improved accuracy, illustrating how learned primitives expand the deployment-level speed/accuracy frontier. 

Contributions. 

• We formulate numerical library learning , the workload-driven problem of deciding which new mathematical primitives are worth expert implementation for a given numerical application. 

• We present GrowLibm , which repurposes the Herbie superoptimizer as a library learner by mining candidates from its search space, semantically deduplicating and generalizing them, and ranking them by counterfactual utility.        

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 3
> Herbie
> Workload: source kernels
> Platform: default
> Extract subs & cut at operators
> Canonicalize & deduplicate
> Generation
> Convert to FPCore
> Numerical kernels
> Herbie
> Workload: candidates
> Platform: grow
> Rank by frequency, urgency, and size
> Add top candidates to platform (deduplicate by implication)
> Selection
> Herbie
> Workload: source kernels
> Platform: grow
> Filter by number of uses
> Proposed primitives

Fig. 1. The GrowLibm pipeline. Given numerical kernels converted to FPCore [ 11 , 18 ], a standard floating-point interchange format, the generation phase runs Herbie to explore equivalent programs, extracts subexpressions from Herbie’s intermediates, and canonicalizes and deduplicates them. The selection phase iteratively ranks candidates by frequency, urgency, and size; resolves implications between top candidates so that redundant variants are not both selected; and adds the winners to Herbie’s platform for re-evaluation. A final Herbie pass confirms which candidates are actually used in optimized kernels, producing the proposed primitives. 

• We show that, across PROJ, CoolProp, and Basilisk, GrowLibm finds compact primitives that a numerical expert can implement effectively, that Herbie can reuse in optimized kernels, and that expand the reachable speed/accuracy frontier. 

• We demonstrate a path to deployment with a prototype LLVM matcher that recognizes learned primitives in optimized IR and rewrites them to deployed implementations. 

2 Overview 

We illustrate numerical library learning with a worked example from the PROJ cartography li-brary [ 37 ], developed by the Open Source Geospatial Foundation [ 38 ], which is used for transforming geospatial data between coordinate systems. PROJ includes a large library of map projections, each of which defines forward and inverse projection functions. Figure 2 shows an example projection function from the Swiss Oblique Mercator projection, a variation on the normal Mercator projection that tilts the projection cylinder so that the line of true scale runs west to east across Switzerland. This (obscure) projection is the standard map projection for the government of Switzerland and thus useful for handling some Swiss government data. This short code snippet uses several complex mathematical expressions like 2 atan (exp (𝑥 )) − 𝜋 /2,

log (tan (𝜋 /4 + 0.5𝑥 )) , and log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) , which are part of the domain of coordinate system transformation. These expressions are compiled, on typical systems, to calls into an underlying system math library like GLibC, which have typically been written by experts in math function implementation. These system math libraries are accurate and fast, largely due to the efforts of those same experts and the broader numerical analysis community. The problem is that, though system math libraries may be fast and accurate, composing accurate functions does not always result in accurate expressions. In fact, all three expressions noted above— 

2 atan (exp (𝑥 )) − 𝜋 /2, log (tan (𝜋 /4 + 0.5𝑥 )) , and log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) —are inaccurate for certain  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 4Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha

static PJ_XY somerc_e_forward(PJ_LP lp, PJ *P) { /* Ellipsoidal, forward */ PJ_XY xy = {0.0, 0.0}; double phip, lamp, phipp, lampp, sp, cp; 

struct pj_somerc *Q = static_cast< struct pj_somerc *>(P->opaque); sp = P->e * sin(lp.phi); phip = 2. * atan(exp(Q->c * (log(tan(M_FORTPI + 0.5 * lp.phi)) -Q->hlf_e * log((1. + sp) / (1. - sp))) + Q->K)) - M_HALFPI; }

Fig. 2. The forward ellipsoidal projection function for the Swiss Oblique Mercator projection from the PROJ library [ 42 ]. Note the complex compositions of mathematical functions, including 2 atan (exp (𝑥 )) − 𝜋 /2,

log (tan (𝜋 /4 + 0.5𝑥 )) , and log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) . Accurately evaluating these compositions is challenging in floating point and generally beyond the capabilities of existing numerical superoptimizers. 

double log1pmd( double x) { 

static const double 

Lp1 = 6.666666666666735130e-01, Lp2 = 3.999999999940941908e-01, Lp3 = 2.857142874366239149e-01, Lp4 = 2.222219843214978396e-01, Lp5 = 1.818357216161805012e-01, Lp6 = 1.531383769920937332e-01, Lp7 = 1.479819860511658591e-01; 

double z = x * x; 

double R = fma(z, fma(z, fma(z, fma(z, fma(z, fma(z, Lp7, Lp6), Lp5), Lp4), Lp3), Lp2), Lp1); 

return fma(x * z, R, 2.0 * x); }

Fig. 3. A numerical expert’s implementation of log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) , using a polynomial that is accurate for inputs |𝑥 | < .1716 . This implementation borrows from the famous fdlibm math library. The input range is sufficient for the use case in Figure 2 because there the relevant input 𝑥 is the eccentricity of the Earth times the sine of the oblique angle, well within that input range. 

inputs: 2 atan (exp (𝑥 )) − 𝜋 /2 is inaccurate for 𝑥 ≈ 0, log (tan (𝜋 /4 + 0.5𝑥 )) is inaccurate for |𝑥 | > 1

or |𝑥 | ≈ 0, and log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) is inaccurate for 𝑥 ≈ 0. Determining whether these situations are physically realistic, and understanding their impact on application-level metrics like geospatial accuracy, requires substantial expertise in the domain. If the expressions are, in fact, problematically inaccurate, numerical methods expertise is further required to fix the underlying problem. One option for improving expression accuracy is any of a number of numerical superoptimizers and compilers developed by the programming languages community, including Herbie [ 40 , 45 , 46 ], Salsa [ 9, 10 , 21 ], and Rosa [ 12 , 22 ]. While these tools are convenient, the techniques they apply are limited and they are therefore less capable than a numerical analyst. Herbie, for example, can propose an accurate (though slower) implementation of log1pmd 1 but cannot find an accurate                  

> 1Herbie proposes log1p (𝑥 ) − log1p (− 𝑥 ); another valid implementation might be 2atanh (𝑥 ). Neither of these implementa-tions is as fast as the expert implementation of Figure 3, which leverages additional domain knowledge. , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 5
> tmerc.cpp:130: xy.x = Q->ml0 * log((1. + b) / (1. - b)); omerc.cpp:62: v = 0.5 * Q->ArB * log((1. - U) / (1. + U)); isea.cpp:1343: double log1pe_1me = log((1 + P->e) / (1 - P->e)); labrd.cpp:26: V2 = .5 * P->e * Q->A * log((1. + t) / (1. - t)); labrd.cpp:76: V2 = .5 * P->e * Q->A * log((1. + tpe) / (1. - tpe)); labrd.cpp:126: Q->C = .5 * P->e * Q->A * log((1. + t) / (1. - t)) + somerc.cpp:27: Q->hlf_e * log((1. + sp) / (1. - sp))) + somerc.cpp:54: Q->hlf_e * log((1. + esp) / (1. - esp))) * somerc.cpp:89: Q->hlf_e * log((1. + sp) / (1. - sp)));
> Fig. 4. Other lines of code in PROJ that compute the log1pmd expression. Note that some of these uses have the 1+𝑥 term in the numerator of the division, but others have it in the denominator. This is common in numerical code and means that finding common functions requires reasoning about algebraic equivalence and composition.

implementation of either of the other two mathematical expressions in Figure 2, illustrating the gap that expert-implemented primitives can fill. If automated tools are insufficient, a numerical methods expert might be the solution. Typi-cally, a numerical methods expert would extract the problematic computation—any of those three expressions above—into a library function and then write a custom, accurate implementation of that function, guided by their numerical methods expertise. For example, the expert may choose to extract the log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) function into a custom helper called, perhaps, log1pmd (for “logarithm, 1 plus minus divide”), and then implement that function using, for example, a polynomial approximation, as in Figure 3. Or, the expert may be aware of an existing implementation of the same function; the influential fdlibm math library’s implementation of log using an implemen-tation of log1pmd as a subroutine, and an expert might extract and reuse that subroutine. The expert’s help might be useful even when automated tools provide a solution. For example, the expert implementation in Figure 3 leverages additional domain information about the possible range of 𝑥 (it is equal to 𝑒 sin 𝜙 , where 𝑒 is the eccentricity of the Earth, so |𝑥 | < 0.08182 ) and is thus substantially faster than Herbie’s implementation. The problem, of course, is that even a project as influential as PROJ cannot expect unlimited attention from numerical methods experts. They must thus prioritize. For example, while the Swiss Oblique Mercator is surely important for Switzerland, it would be a pity to use valuable numerical methods expertise on what is essentially a single-country library routine. A common, reusable routine that handles a computation common to many projections would be more important. Luckily, log1pmd is a common and reusable routine: the expression it computes appears across many projections. But finding these common routines in a large existing codebase, to maximally leverage available numerical expertise, is not a task any existing tool can assist with. 

GrowLibm is the first such tool. GrowLibm analyzes a large collection of numerical basic blocks and finds common, reusable subroutines that a numerical expert can implement to improve application accuracy and performance. These subroutines are short mathematical expressions that cannot be improved by current numerical superoptimizers yet which appear in many basic blocks and significantly influence those blocks’ accuracy and performance. As the log1pmd example illustrates, recovering reusable primitives from a workload poses three challenges: recognizing semantically equivalent variants across different contexts, estimating which candidate abstractions would most improve the workload, and generalizing beyond the specific expressions found in source code. GrowLibm addresses each by repurposing existing superoptimizer machinery.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 6Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha

First, GrowLibm can reason about semantic equivalence, including under algebraic identities. For example, Figure 4 shows a number of other uses of log1pmd in PROJ. Many of the matches in Figure 4 use different variable names, or even different expressions, for 𝑥 . Also, some use 

log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) , which is what log1pmd implements, while others use log (( 1 − 𝑥 )/( 1 + 𝑥 )) ,which would have to call log1pmd (− 𝑥 ). GrowLibm is nonetheless able to see that log1pmd is common to all of them because it leverages Herbie’s e-graph-based equivalence reasoning, which can efficiently determine which candidate library functions are equivalent or, more weakly, can be used to implement one another. Second, GrowLibm can reason about the impact of each candidate library function on the accuracy and performance of the expression as a whole. For example, Figure 2 also includes the expression 𝑒 · sin (𝜙 ). However, this expression is not particularly inaccurate, and moreover its performance is less important because it is not used along the maximum delay path. GrowLibm thus does not suggest it for implementation. More generally, GrowLibm leverages Herbie’s accuracy and performance cost model, which can estimate counterfactual impact (how much a workload would improve if a given primitive were available), to determine which candidates are worth expert attention. Finally, GrowLibm is able to generalize and abstract over the patterns actually found in source code. For example, in Figure 2, inlining the sp variable (as a compiler would do) reveals that the actual function being computed is not log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) but the more specific log (( 1 + 𝑒 ·

sin 𝜙 )/( 1 − 𝑒 · sin 𝜙 )) . However, this more specific function is not common to all of the other uses in Figure 4. To generalize and abstract in this way, GrowLibm leverages Herbie’s search procedure, which explores algebraic rewrites, approximations, and symmetry breaking, to find expressions 

related to the ones literally in the source code that are attractive library functions. Notably, none of these capabilities are specific to GrowLibm or to numerical computing. Equiva-lence reasoning, impact estimation, and generalization are core components of any superoptimizer; 

GrowLibm simply repurposes them for library learning rather than optimization. Any domain with a superoptimizer (whether for numerical kernels, binary code, SQL queries, or hardware circuits) could, in principle, apply the same approach to discover which new primitives would most benefit its workloads. Sections 3 and 4 describe how GrowLibm realizes this connection in detail. 

3 Generating Candidate Primitives 

This section describes how GrowLibm generates candidate primitives: subexpressions that, if given expert implementations, could serve as new primitives for the target application’s kernels. The input is the application’s kernels, represented as basic blocks in FPCore; the output is a large, deduplicated set of candidates to be ranked by the selection phase (Section 4). The core insight is that a superoptimizer’s search procedure already explores the relevant space: to optimize a kernel, it enumerates many equivalent programs, and subexpressions of those programs, after canonicalization and generalization, are natural candidates for new primitives. Superoptimizers must search through a vast collection of programs—ideally, all—that are equiva-lent to a given input program. For example, the Herbie numerical compiler / superoptimizer uses e-graphs to efficiently search through algebraically equivalent terms, and also has subcomponents for function approximation and symmetry breaking. It uses this search procedure to select programs equivalent to its input program but either more accurate or faster to evaluate (or some mix of both along a Pareto frontier). Some of these equivalent programs will include novel subsequences of instructions with clear semantics that could be extracted into a candidate primitive. Because GrowLibm reuses Herbie’s  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 7

search procedure, which has been refined over a decade of real-world deployment, 2 it inherits a high-quality, high-throughput candidate generation procedure without needing to build one from scratch. More specifically, GrowLibm ’s candidate generation pass runs Herbie on all of the input kernels. For each input kernel, Herbie searches over many—typically thousands or tens of thousands— equivalent programs, pruning away the vast majority, and outputs the best ones it found. Cru-cially, GrowLibm ignores Herbie’s final output, which cannot yet benefit from the primitives that 

GrowLibm is trying to discover, and instead collects all intermediate expressions explored before 

pruning. This inverts the usual role of the superoptimizer: rather than using the search to find the best program, GrowLibm mines the search itself for the subexpressions that recur across many kernels. These intermediates, not the final optimized program, are what matter for library learning, because they represent the space of expressions whose counterfactual utility GrowLibm will later estimate. The programs found during the superoptimizer search are equivalent to one of the original kernels. Since GrowLibm is searching for candidate primitives that could be used in one of those kernels, it then considers every subexpression of one of the searched programs and extracts arbitrary cuts. For example, if the search step considered the program (log (1 + 𝑥 · 𝑦 )) 2 then GrowLibm 

would consider subexpressions like log (1 + 𝑥 · 𝑦 ) and cuts of such subexpressions like log (1 + 𝑧 ).To produce cuts, GrowLibm does not use a fixed depth. Instead, it considers cuts at every binary or wider operator. Thus, in log (1 + 𝑥 · 𝑦 ), the full set of cuts would be log (𝑧 ), log (1 + 𝑧 ), and 

log (1 +𝑥 ·𝑦 ). However, log (𝑧 +𝑥 ·𝑦 ) would not be considered, because the constant 1 is not a binary operator. The intuition is that binary operators increase fan-out and thus the number of arguments of candidate primitives (primitives with many arguments are harder to implement), but unary operators do not increase fan-out and there is thus no reason to introduce cuts at them. In general, for balanced binary trees, the number of such cuts grows exponentially, but in our experiments this behavior was rare and the number of cuts was generally small. We tested alternative cutting strategies, including both simpler fixed-depth strategies and also more complex strategies that adapted based on the identity of cut operators, and found that this simple binary heuristic worked best. After extracting all cuts, GrowLibm has a large collection of candidate primitives to pass to the selection step. However, this collection contains many duplicates. These duplicates happen for two reasons. First, two expressions might be the same except for alpha renaming, such as log (1 + 𝑥 )

and log (1 + 𝑦 ). Second, two expressions might be equivalent to each other, such as log (1 + 𝑥 )

and log (𝑥 + 1). The number of duplicates can be extreme, and deduplicating makes GrowLibm ’s selection stage much faster. GrowLibm thus deduplicates expressions by, first, normalizing all variable names; then, considering all permutations of variables; and finally using an e-graph, again repurposing the superoptimizer’s equivalence machinery, to prove equivalence between as many expressions as possible. For example, given the expression 𝑥  

> 1+𝑦

, GrowLibm first normalizes variable names, producing 𝑡 1 

> 1+𝑡 2

. It then considers all permutations of the normalized variables, yielding both  

> 𝑡 1
> 1+𝑡 2

and 𝑡 2 

> 1+𝑡 1

. This allows GrowLibm to deduplicate expressions such as 𝑥  

> 1+𝑦

and 𝑦  

> 1+𝑥

, which differ only by a renaming of variables. Any two expressions any of whose permutations were proven equal are deduplicated (and the total duplicate count saved for use in selection). This approach can deduplicate expressions like (1 + 𝑥 ) · 𝑦 and 𝑥 · ( 1 + 𝑦 ), which can be proven equivalent only by considering both alpha renaming (swapping 𝑥 and 𝑦 ) and algebraic rearrangement (commutativity of addition). Nonetheless, this equivalence procedure is expensive and requires limiting expressions  

> 2Herbie has users at national labs (Sandia, NASA) and in industry (NVIDIA, Intel), and has been the subject of numerous publications optimizing its search procedures [15–17, 27, 33, 39, 40, 45, 46, 60]. , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 8Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha

to those with up to three variables. Since math library primitives with many variables are harder to implement, this restriction is relatively mild. 

4 Selecting Library Primitives 

The generation phase produces hundreds of thousands of candidate primitives. The task of the selection phase is to choose the small number of these that would most improve the target ap-plication. The core insight is that the superoptimizer can directly answer the library designer’s question: if a given primitive existed, how much would the workload improve? This is exactly the counterfactual utility that the superoptimizer’s cost model is designed to estimate. 

4.1 Evaluating Candidates via Platform Extension 

Superoptimizers are generally driven by a mechanized semantics for the available instructions in the target programming language or platform, which are used for proving equivalence to the original program, as well as a cost model of some kind for evaluating which instruction sequences are best. Herbie, for example, is parameterized by a platform description [45 ] which defines all available floating-point operations, their input and output types, their real-number semantics, and functions estimating their cost and accuracy. Herbie then searches for possible instruction sequences using real-number reasoning over instruction semantics and combinatorial optimization over their cost functions. Candidate primitives can then represent extensions to that platform definition, drawing its types and semantics from the primitive’s definition and adding hypothesized cost and accuracy functions. Each candidate primitive can be evaluated by 1) extending the superoptimizer platform with that candidate primitive; 2) re-optimizing the workload’s kernels with this extended platform; and 3) measuring the increase in accuracy and performance. This is the counterfactual utility 

computation: the superoptimizer directly answers the question “would this workload be better off if this primitive were available?” We write acc (𝐴, 𝑃 ) for the normalized accuracy achieved by superoptimizing the kernels in 𝐴 when the platform is extended with a set of primitives 𝑃 , averaged over all kernels and bounded in [0, 1].Suppose the target application has a set 𝐾 of kernels. The candidate generation step superop-timizes all of 𝐾 , yielding a set 𝐶 of candidate primitives. GrowLibm ’s ultimate goal is to select a subset 𝑁 ⊆ 𝐶 to maximize acc (𝐾, 𝑁 ). A maximally naive approach, enumerating all subsets of 

𝐶 and re-optimizing 𝐾 with each, would require |𝐾 | · | 𝐶 ||𝑁 | superoptimizations. However, this is wildly impractical: in our evaluation we have roughly |𝐾 | ≈ 10 2, |𝐶 | ≈ 10 6, and |𝑁 | ≈ 10 1, meaning this would take approximately 10 62 superoptimizations, which each take a few seconds. GrowLibm 

thus applies a series of heuristics and optimizations to reduce the number of superoptimizations required to some reasonable number. We discuss the ranking heuristics below but first focus on another heuristic: the cost and accuracy functions used when extending the superoptimizer platform with a candidate primitive. It is critical that the cost and accuracy definitions be optimistic : the intention is for a human expert to help implement the selected candidate primitives, so their cost and accuracy will be better than the implementations found by the superoptimizer. To this end, we tell the superoptimizer to assume that candidates can be implemented with no error and a cost that is 1/5 of the cost of their naive implementation. These optimistic cost and accuracy definitions will incentivize the superoptimizer to find uses for the candidate primitives, which will help determine which candidate primitives are most useful. There is, of course, a risk of being over -optimistic, in which case the selected candidates may simply be impossible to implement efficiently, a problem we discuss further in Section 5. These optimistic assumptions are used only for ranking; Section 6 validates the final selections using real expert implementations. To reduce this risk, however, the ranking heuristics favor terms that are more likely to be efficiently implementable.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 9

4.2 Ranking Candidates by Size, Frequency, and Urgency 

The first simplification GrowLibm makes is to use a greedy strategy to grow the set of selected primitives one primitive at a time. That is, GrowLibm maintains a set of already-selected candidate primitives 𝑆 . It then considers each non-selected candidate primitive 𝑓 and searches for one that maximizes acc (𝐾, 𝑆 ∪ { 𝑓 }) , adding it to 𝑆 and repeating the process until 𝑆 is the necessary size. A naive implementation of such a greedy algorithm, however, would still require |𝐾 | · | 𝐶 | · | 𝑁 |

superoptimizations, still too large at around 10 9.To further reduce runtime, GrowLibm observes that a candidate primitive must have three properties to be worth selecting, each of which can be estimated from the superoptimizer’s existing machinery. First, a size heuristic is based on the candidate’s cost in the superoptimizer’s cost model. This heuristic favors smaller candidate primitives, meaning a smaller AST describing their real-number behavior. Smaller candidate primitives are typically easier for a person to understand and implement, and they’re less likely to be overly specialized. Second, a frequency heuristic favors candidate primitives that can be used more frequently in the target application. Frequency counts how often the superoptimizer considered an expression containing the candidate primitive. This exploits the superoptimizer’s search procedure as a proxy for how likely the superoptimizer was to use the candidate primitive, if it were available. Third, an urgency heuristic favors candidate primitives that the superoptimizer is unable to improve on its own. If the superoptimizer can find a high-quality implementation of the candidate primitive on its own, then there is no need for an expert to write their own. Urgency is measured by 1 − acc (𝑓 , 𝑆 ), meaning by superoptimizing each candidate 𝑓 given the already-selected candidates 𝑆 ; accuracy is then given by the gap between actually-achieved accuracy and maximum accuracy. The three heuristics are combined in a straightforward way, taking the product of frequency and urgency and dividing by size. We’ve observed that candidate primitives that score highly on the three heuristics are also those most likely to increase acc (𝐾, 𝑆 ). Moreover, the heuristics are cheaper to measure: size and frequency can be measured during the original generation stage, while the urgency heuristic just requires 

|𝑁 | · | 𝐶 | superoptimizations. Adding |𝐾 | superoptimizations for the generation stage, this brings the runtime down to |𝐾 | + | 𝑁 | · | 𝐶 | ≈ 10 7 superoptimizations. In practice, all three heuristics help separate promising candidates from unpromising ones. That said, low-ranked candidates by one measure are also often bad by some other measure. For example, a long, overly-complex candidate primitive is likely to be not only large (failing the size heuristic) but also overly specialized (failing the frequency heuristic), while a candidate primitive with many unnecessary or duplicative operations is likely to be both overly large (failing the size heuristic) and optimizable through simple means (failing the urgency heuristic). This suggests filtering first on the size and frequency heuristics, which do not require superoptimizations to evaluate, and only using urgency as a second pass. We therefore split the heuristic ranking into two stages: we first select the top 𝑇 1 candidate primitives by the size and frequency heuristics, and then rank just those on urgency. This reduces runtime from |𝐾 | + | 𝑁 | · | 𝐶 | superoptimizations to |𝐾 | + | 𝑁 | · 𝑇 1; GrowLibm 

sets 𝑇 1 = 625 , so this is approximately 6 × 10 3 superoptimizations. Setting 𝑇 1 high ensures that the overall ranking isn’t changed much: the top-ranked candidates by size, frequency, and urgency must be among the top 𝑇 1 by size and frequency alone because relatively many candidates (roughly 

4% in our evaluation) have high urgency. Candidates with low size and frequency could not have high enough urgency (since urgency is bounded in [0, 1]) to end up higher ranked than them. Figure 5 confirms this structure empirically: size and frequency spread across candidates, while urgency is sharply bimodal, with roughly 96% of candidates near zero and a small fraction with high urgency. This is precisely the distribution that makes filtering by size and frequency first, then ranking on urgency, effective.             

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 10 Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha 10 310 4
> Size
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 150
> 175
> 200
> Candidates
> Size Distribution 10 210 310 410 5
> Frequency
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Candidates
> Frequency Distribution 010 20 30 40 50 60 70
> Urgency (%)
> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300
> 400
> Candidates
> Urgency Distribution

Fig. 5. Distributions of the size, frequency, and urgency heuristics for a PROJ run. Size and frequency are well-distributed, providing good discriminative signal. Urgency is concentrated near zero with a long tail of high-urgency candidates, confirming the bimodal structure that justifies two-stage filtering. 

4.3 Pruning Redundant Candidates via Implication 

To reduce runtime further, GrowLibm selects candidates in batches rather than one at a time. However, simply selecting the top few candidates by size, frequency, and urgency often selected variants of the same candidate. For example, both log (1 + 𝑥 ) and log (1 + 𝑥 · 𝑦 ) might rank highly on size, frequency, and urgency. These candidate primitives are not equivalent, so they will not be deduplicated in the generation phase. Yet any use of log (1 + 𝑥 ) can be replaced by calling 

log (1 + 𝑥 · 𝑦 ) with 𝑦 = 1; conversely, any use of log (1 + 𝑥 · 𝑦 ) can be replaced by calling log (1 + 𝑥 )

with its argument set to 𝑥 · 𝑦 . Asking a human expert to implement both would be a waste of their time. In fact, seeing variants like this is expected: these candidates often had similar frequency because they were both cuts of the same initial expression and similar urgency due to similar numerical problems (here, the zero that log has at 1). For another example, consider the candidate primitive pow (cos (𝑥 ), 6); any use of this candidate primitive can be replaced by a use of the more general pow (𝑥, 6) function, but the reverse is not true, since cos (𝑥 ) does not range over the full domain of 𝑥 . In this case, it would be better to select the more general candidate primitive and defer selecting the more specific one until its urgency could be recomputed. Resolving such implications is critical to adding multiple top-ranked candidates at a time. Consider a “batch” of 𝑇 2 top-ranked candidates by size, frequency, and urgency. GrowLibm measures acc (𝑔, 𝑆 ∪{𝑓 }) for each pair of candidates 𝑓 and 𝑔 in the batch; if the result passes 95%, it records that 𝑓 ≺ 𝑔 ,meaning that selecting 𝑓 makes 𝑔 redundant. Since the batch already contained candidates that rank highly on urgency, acc (𝑔, 𝑆 ) is generally low; if acc (𝑔, 𝑆 ∪ { 𝑓 }) is high, then selecting 𝑓 obviates the need to select 𝑔 . This reuses the counterfactual utility computation: the superoptimizer determines whether one candidate renders another redundant by checking whether the workload improves just as much without it. The ≺ relation forms a directed graph of the 𝑇 2 candidate primitives in the batch; GrowLibm partitions this graph into a directed acyclic graph of strongly-connected components [ 54 ] and selects one candidate primitive from each strongly connected component with no incoming edges in the acyclic portion of the graph. This ensures that none of the selected primitives obviate each other, avoiding wasted expert work. Assuming a constant fraction 𝛼 of the 𝑇 2 candidate primitives is selected, the number of superoptimizations needed is reduced to 

|𝐾 | + (| 𝑁 |/ 𝛼𝑇 2)( 𝑇 1 +𝑇 22 ). In GrowLibm , 𝑇 2 is set to 25 and 𝛼 is approximately 14 , reducing the number of superoptimizations to roughly 10 2 + 10 0.25 ·25 (625 + 25 2) ≈ 2,100 . Since each superoptimization takes a few seconds, the final pipeline runs in a few hours (see Section 6 for more). 

Tuning 𝑇 1 and 𝑇 2 for tractable selection. Both 𝑇 1 and 𝑇 2 are parameters that trade off between the quality of the selected primitives and the time taken by the selection phase. To select 𝑇 1, we observed that our average urgency across candidate primitives was roughly 4% . In practice, the urgency is  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 11

very bimodal—roughly 96% of candidates have barely any urgency and the remaining roughly 4% 

have high urgency. Thus, the top .04 𝑇 1 candidates by the size, frequency, and urgency heuristics are likely to be among the top 𝑇 1 candidates by just size and frequency. Since the implication step only uses a batch of the top 𝑇 2 candidates, this suggests that 𝑇 2 = .04 𝑇 1. At the same time, to minimize the number of superoptimizations, 𝑇 1 and 𝑇 2 should be chosen to minimize (1/𝑇 2)( 𝑇 1 + 𝑇 22 ). This function is minimized at 𝑇 2 = √𝑇 1. Combining both formulas yields 𝑇 1 = 625 and 𝑇 2 = 25 .

5 Implementing Library Primitives 

GrowLibm suggests candidate primitives, but does not implement them automatically; that task requires numerical expertise. A key question, then, is whether GrowLibm ’s suggestions are at the right scope for bounded expert effort. To test this, our evaluation required implementing each GrowLibm -selected primitive. This section details those implementations and demonstrates that a range of standard techniques (existing library functions, error-free transformations, range reduction, and polynomial approximation) suffice to produce fast, accurate implementations. For each primitive, we aimed for 1-ULP or few-ULP accuracy while keeping cost low enough for Herbie to prefer them. To aid readers (and ourselves), we assign names to each primitive below, though 

GrowLibm itself outputs only mathematical specifications. Unless otherwise noted, all primitives below are from PROJ, the largest and most diverse of our three workloads (92 kernels across five projections); CoolProp and Basilisk each produced a smaller, more focused set. Our implementations were guided by one of the authors, an expert on elementary function implementation. However, to bound the effort available for implementations, we asked the expert to only communicate short instructions to another author, a student who had never previously implemented math functions; the expert author performed no implementation on their own. Besides their own abilities and the assistance of GPT 5.3 Codex, the second author additionally used components from the well-known fdlibm library [ 35 ] as well as the Sollya tool [ 7] for generating polynomial approximations, both suggested by our human expert. Each implementation was done in C, compiled by Apple clang version 17.0.0, and executed in a timing and testing harness. The harness compared the computed results to a high-precision result produced by the Rival library [ 16 ]to estimate accuracy and also timed the executions to estimate cost. The resulting accuracies and costs were then used to create a new Herbie platform with all candidate primitive implementations, which was used to again superoptimize the target application. 

5.1 Existing Library Functions 

Some of GrowLibm ’s suggested primitives already have implementations in standard math libraries or can be handled by Herbie with higher tuning parameters, validating that GrowLibm ’s selections align with known numerical practice. 

GrowLibm selects the standard primitive hypot (𝑥, 𝑦 ) =√︁ 𝑥 2 + 𝑦 2. This function is already available in standard math libraries, so no additional effort was needed to implement it besides linking to the correct function name. 

GrowLibm selected the primitive verdcos (𝑥 ) = cos (2𝑥 ) − 1, a variant of what’s known as the “vercosine” function. While Herbie could not find a better implementation at the standard settings used by GrowLibm , simply raising tuning parameters like the number of iterations allowed Herbie to propose the implementation verdcos (𝑥 ) = −2 sin (𝑥 )2, which is fast and accurate. Presumably, if 

GrowLibm had used these higher parameters in its generation and selection stages, verdcos would not have been selected, as it would have had low urgency. 

GrowLibm selected the primitive log1pmd (𝑥 ) = log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) . Running Herbie with higher tuning parameters allowed Herbie to propose the implementation log1pmd (𝑥 ) = 2atanh (𝑥 ), 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 12 Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha

but we also noticed that fdlibm includes an optimized implementation using a degree-7 polynomial, which was faster and equally accurate. 

5.2 Double-double tricks 

Other primitives require precision-extending techniques to handle rounding error in their inputs. 

GrowLibm selected the primitive sinprod (𝑥, 𝑦 ) = sin (𝑥 · 𝑦 ), and an analogous cosine product primitive. When 𝑥 and 𝑦 are large, relative to the period 2𝜋 of sin , the direct implementation is imprecise because the rounding error can be larger than the period. Our human expert proposed computing 𝑥 ·𝑦 as an “error-free transformation” [ 36 ], which returns both the typical floating-point product 𝑧 = 𝑥 ˆ×𝑦 and its error 𝑒 = fma (𝑥, 𝑦, −𝑧 ); then sin (𝑧 + 𝑒 ) is evaluated using the sine sum-of-angles identity. For maximum performance, the standard library sincos function was used, which computes both sin (𝑧 ) and cos (𝑧 ) in a single, faster function call, and likewise for sin (𝑒 ) and cos (𝑒 ).

GrowLibm also selected the primitive sinquot (𝑥, 𝑦 ) = sin (𝑥 /𝑦 ), and the analogous cosine quotient primitive. An initial implementation based on error-free transformations, analogous to 

sinprod , wasn’t particularly accurate, which our human expert suggested was due to the fact that the error-free transformation for 𝑥 · 𝑦 is exact, while the one for 𝑥 /𝑦 is not. Our human expert then suggested an implementation where, for large values of 𝑥 , the 𝑦 parameter was split into two halves 

𝑦 ℎ and 𝑦 𝑙 , and then Payne-Hanek reduction was used to compute 𝑥 mod 𝑦𝜋 /2 using a high-precision multiplication of 𝜋 /2 with 𝑦 ℎ and 𝑦 𝑙 . This did produce a highly-accurate implementation (via the efforts of GPT 5.3 Codex, with minimal additional prompting), but the resulting implementation was exceptionally slow, and Herbie did not choose to use it in any target application basic blocks. Our expert suggested that further performance improvements would be difficult. 

5.3 Range Reduction and Polynomial Approximation 

The most common implementation pattern combines range reduction with polynomial approxima-tion, a standard technique in math library development. 

GrowLibm selected the primitive invgud (𝑥 ) = log (tan (𝜋 /4 + 𝑥 /2)) . This function is apparently called the “inverse Gudermannian” and is related to the Mercator map projection. Our human expert suggested a range reduction using the rem_pio2 function from fdlibm followed by a Sollya-generated polynomial approximation. This produced a highly-accurate implementation (1 ULP of error on all tested points) that was also highly efficient. For the Basilisk workload, GrowLibm selected the primitives powcos2 (𝑥 ) = pow (cos (𝑥 ), 2),

powcos4 (𝑥 ), and powcos6 (𝑥 ). For these functions, our initial attempt used the rem_pio2 range reduction and a Sollya-generated polynomial approximation, but the results were too slow and Herbie did not choose to use them. Our expert suggested a faster range reduction from the CORE-Math library [ 50 ], which was substantially faster though less accurate on a few points. This faster implementation was in fact used by Herbie. For CoolProp, GrowLibm selected the primitive pow1ms (𝑥, 𝑦 ) = pow (( 𝑥 − 1)2, 𝑦 ). Our expert suggested rewriting this as 

pow (( 𝑥 − 1)2, 𝑦 ) = exp (log (( 𝑥 − 1)2) · 𝑦 ) = exp (log (1 + 𝑥 · ( 𝑥 − 2)) · 𝑦 )

and using the standard log1p function to evaluate log (1+𝑧 ), with 𝑧 = 𝑥 · ( 𝑥 −2). This implementation was fast enough to be used by Herbie. In short, standard techniques sufficed for all but two of GrowLibm ’s suggested primitives. The exceptions, sinquot and cosquot , demanded multi-word arithmetic that our expert judged too slow to be practical. The remaining primitives were all implemented to near-1-ULP accuracy without requiring novel numerical methods, suggesting that GrowLibm tends to select primitives at a useful level of difficulty.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 13

6 Evaluation 

We evaluate GrowLibm ’s suggested primitives across six research questions: RQ1 What new primitives does GrowLibm propose? RQ2 Can an expert implement these primitives well? RQ3 Can Herbie use the new primitives to optimize the targeted kernels? RQ4 Do the new primitives improve performance and error of the targeted kernels? RQ5 Can learned primitives be deployed in compiled applications? RQ6 How long does GrowLibm take to run? We evaluate GrowLibm on 3 open-source target applications from different scientific domains: (1) PROJ [ 43 ] is a library of geodetic transformations and cartographic projections, for example for transforming geospatial datasets from one coordinate reference system to another. (2) CoolProp [ 2] is a library for calculating the thermophysical properties of fluids, for example for modeling steam turbine power systems. (3) Basilisk, an astrodynamics simulation framework used for modeling spacecraft dynamics, for example for orbit planning or guidance system development. Each project is large enough that superoptimizing the full library with Herbie is infeasible. Instead, we selected a subset of each project: we extracted 92 kernels from PROJ (from five files im-plementing the Krovak, Oblique Mercator, Transverse Mercator, Space Oblique Mercator, and Swiss Oblique Mercator projections), 24 kernels from CoolProp (from one file implementing Helmholtz energy formulations) and 28 kernels from Basilisk (from one file implementing orbital mechanics calculations). We chose related kernels within each project because library learning targets com-mon, reusable primitives, which are more likely to emerge from kernels in the same application domain. We also restricted ourselves to kernels that call at least one elementary function, since those are the kernels that Herbie targets. We converted each kernel into GrowLibm ’s input format (FPCore [ 11 , 18 ]) and then used each project as a separate target application for GrowLibm . We perform all experiments except RQ5 (see Section 6.5) on a machine with an Intel i7-8700K CPU and 32 GiB of RAM running Ubuntu 24.04.4, Rival 2.3, Egg 0.11.0, and Racket 9.1. The following subsections trace GrowLibm ’s suggestions from proposal through deployment. RQ1–RQ3 use Figure 6 to show that GrowLibm proposes compact, domain-appropriate primitives, that these can be implemented accurately (we report Herbie’s average bits of error; lower is better) and efficiently (we report inverse throughput relative to a baseline; lower is better), and that Herbie reuses them extensively. RQ4 then asks whether these implementations actually improve kernel-level performance, using speed/accuracy frontier curves (Figure 7) and per-kernel error comparisons (Figure 8). RQ5 tests deployment in compiled PROJ code via a prototype LLVM matcher, and RQ6 reports GrowLibm ’s own runtime. 

6.1 RQ1: What Primitives Does GrowLibm Propose? 

GrowLibm mines primitives from the superoptimizer’s search space. Are the results compact, recognizable, and domain-appropriate? The first two columns of Figure 6 list all primitives selected by GrowLibm for PROJ, CoolProp, and Basilisk (in order). All have short, generic specifications. Some, like hypot , are available in standard math libraries. Others, like invgud and verdcos , are (or are variations of) well-known in their domain. For example, invgud is the inverse Gudermannian function , which is known to be related to Mercator projections [ 59 ]. Some functions are surprising; for example, we were surprised when Herbie rated the cosprod and sinprod primitives as inaccurate when implemented naively. However, consultation with our expert revealed that for very large inputs 𝑥 and 𝑦 (such that 𝑥𝑦 > 252 ), the rounding error of 𝑥𝑦 can be comparable to or bigger than the period of sin or cos , in which case  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 14 Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha

Naive Expert Name Formula Cost Error Cost Error Uses hypot √︁ 𝑥 2 + 𝑦 2 1.201 29.571 0.864 0.000 39 invgud log (tan (( 2𝑥 + 𝜋 )/ 4)) 4.186 59.875 9.955 0.082 22 log1pmd log (( 1 + 𝑥 )/( 1 − 𝑥 )) 2.437 58.944 1.093 0.000 30 cosprod cos (𝑥𝑦 ) 2.106 27.309 4.086 7.684 4sinprod sin (𝑥𝑦 ) 2.145 27.940 4.086 7.728 9cosquot cos (𝑥 /𝑦 ) 2.192 26.896 1.9 · 10 6 0.100 0sinquot sin (𝑥 /𝑦 ) 2.231 28.250 1.9 · 10 6 0.239 0verdcos cos (2𝑥 ) − 1 2.441 15.306 2.562 0.272 10 pow1ms pow (( 𝑥 − 1)2, 𝑦 ) 3.311 15.099 2.855 0.041 87 powcos2 cos (𝑥 )2 4.104 0.285 4.056 0.355 2powcos4 cos (𝑥 )4 4.104 0.414 3.461 0.449 41 powcos6 cos (𝑥 )6 4.104 0.628 3.884 0.726 6

Fig. 6. Library primitives suggested by GrowLibm on three target applications: PROJ, CoolProp, and Basilisk (in order, separated by horizontal lines). For each library primitive, “Naive Implementation” shows the cost (inverse throughput, relative to a baseline) and error (Herbie’s average bits of error metric) of implementing the formula directly, while “Expert Implementation” shows the cost and error of the implementation sug-gested by our expert. GrowLibm ’s suggestions are recognizable as simple, generic primitives whose naive implementations are typically inaccurate, while the expert implementations are, by and large, extremely accurate with acceptable costs. 

more sophisticated implementation of these primitives can improve accuracy. Similarly, we were initially confused about why the pow1ms function squared the 𝑥 − 1 term. Our expert explained to us that, because (𝑥 − 1)2 is guaranteed to be positive, this form of pow1ms is easier to implement accurately; negative first arguments for pow are apparently difficult to handle. In short, examination of GrowLibm ’s proposed primitives supports the idea that these are well-chosen, useful primitives for each target application’s respective domain. Moreover, note that the three target applications have wholly-disjoint sets of GrowLibm -suggested primitives. This shows that GrowLibm is suggesting primitives specific to each target. This is further supported by, for example, the inverse Gudermannian function being known to be related to Mercator projections, variants of which were the source of many of our PROJ kernels. 

6.2 RQ2: Can Experts Implement GrowLibm -selected Primitives? 

For numerical library learning to be practical, the suggested primitives must be at the right scope for bounded expert effort. The next four columns of Figure 6 list the cost and error of both the naive and expert imple-mentations of each GrowLibm -suggested primitive. Lower cost and error is better; the naive implementation is always a direct translation of the formula to floating-point operations, while the expert implementation is that described in Section 5. Error is measured by Herbie and cost is measured by a small benchmarking harness; both use sampling over thousands of inputs. The expert-written implementations are generally highly accurate; other than sinprod and cosprod ,all have less than 1 bit of average error. 3 The naive implementations are generally faster, but their            

> 3Our expert implementations of sinprod and cosprod are inaccurate on points where 𝑥 𝑦 overflows, where both our expert implementation and the naive implementation return NaN. The expert implementations are still much more accurate than a naive implementation on all other points. Our expert did suggest a method to implement sinprod and cosprod accurately even on these most challenging inputs but we didn’t have time to do so. , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 15

inaccuracy makes them nearly unusable, and the expert-written accurate versions are typically only a few times slower than the naive versions. For example, while the expert-written invgud is more than four times slower than a naive implementation, the naive implementation is measured to have almost 60 bits of error by Herbie, 4 while the expert implementation has less than 0.1 bits of error. Three expert implementations— hypot , log1pmd , and pow1ms —are both faster and more accurate than a naive implementation. On the other hand, the three powcos implementations are already accurate in their naive implementation, but their expert implementation is significantly faster. In short, most GrowLibm -suggested primitives were implemented accurately and efficiently by an expert. The only substantial exception to these good results are the cosquot and sinquot primitives. These primitives are challenging to implement accurately because, unlike cosprod and sinprod ,the rounding error of a division operation cannot be captured exactly as a floating-point number. The expert-recommended implementation thus requires extremely expensive multi-word arithmetic operations and, while the result is extremely accurate, it is far too slow for practical use. Further consultation with our expert suggested that, while the implementation could potentially be sped up somewhat, our expert did not see a path toward making these implementations accurate enough and fast enough for real-world practical use. 5

6.3 RQ3: Does Herbie Use the GrowLibm -suggested Primitives? 

This research question directly tests GrowLibm ’s counterfactual utility predictions: if GrowLibm 

predicted that a primitive would be useful, does Herbie actually use it when the primitive is available? The final column of Figure 6 lists how often Herbie used each GrowLibm -suggested primitive to optimize each target application’s kernels. More specifically, we wrote three new platform definition files for Herbie, one for each target application, listing all GrowLibm -suggested primitives for that application , including their cost and accuracy functions. All GrowLibm -suggested primitives are used, except for cosquot and sinquot (which, as discussed above, are too slow for practical use). In sum, all target applications use the GrowLibm -suggested primitives dozens of times, suggesting that these expert-written implementations are genuinely useful in implementing kernels accurately and efficiently. Most notable is CoolProp. Despite the fact that GrowLibm only suggests a single primitive for CoolProp, pow1ms , this one primitive is used 87 times across the CoolProp kernels, suggesting that it is so useful that many kernels invoke it multiple times. This is likely because this primitive’s expert implementation is both faster and more accurate than a naive implementation. In short, expert implementations of GrowLibm -suggested library primitives are useful in superoptimizing all of our target applications. 

6.4 RQ4: Do GrowLibm -suggested Primitives Improve Kernel Performance? 

Expert implementations of GrowLibm -suggested primitives should expand the reachable speed/ac-curacy frontier in two ways: kernels should be faster at any given accuracy level, and the best achievable accuracy should improve. Figure 7 tests the first claim; Figure 8 tests the second. Figure 7 compares the speed of each project’s kernels with and without expert implemen-tations of GrowLibm -suggested primitives. Each curve aggregates all kernels that use at least one GrowLibm -suggested primitive, plotting speedup as a function of accuracy level. Using the 

GrowLibm -suggested primitives results in substantially lower cost at any given level of accuracy.  

> 4In Herbie’s metric, this means the naive implementation frequently has the incorrect exponent .
> 5Our expert did describe the task of implementing these two primitives accurately as a “fun puzzle”. , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.

16 Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%             

> Accuracy
> 0.9x
> 1x
> 1.1x
> 1.2x
> 1.3x
> 1.4x
> 1.5x
> 1.6x
> 1.7x
> Speedup over vanilla
> PROJ
> vanilla
> growlibm 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
> Accuracy
> 1x
> 1.2x
> 1.4x
> 1.6x
> 1.8x
> 2x
> Speedup over vanilla
> CoolProp
> vanilla
> growlibm 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
> Accuracy
> 1x
> 1.2x
> 1.4x
> 1.6x
> 1.8x
> 2x
> 2.2x
> 2.4x
> Speedup over vanilla
> Basilisk
> vanilla
> growlibm

Fig. 7. Speedup curves for PROJ, CoolProp, and Basilisk; higher is better. Each curve compares Herbie cost estimates with and without the GrowLibm -suggested library primitives for a given level of accuracy. Specifically, each curve aggregates all of the kernels in the target application where a GrowLibm -suggested library primitive is used and which meet a given average accuracy level. GrowLibm -suggested library primitives significantly speed up implementations across the accuracy spectrum, with the largest speedups at high accuracies where expert implementations of GrowLibm -suggested primitives are most important. 

This is despite the fact that many expert-written implementations are slower than naive implemen-tations. Because these implementations are so much more accurate than a naive implementation, they allow Herbie to reduce the accuracy of other parts of the kernel, recovering the lost perfor-mance and then some. More precisely, on the PROJ benchmarks, the GrowLibm -enhanced platform definition allows Herbie to achieve speedups of up to 1.6× for accuracy levels above 80%. The same happens for CoolProp, with speedups of up to 2×. For Basilisk, where the GrowLibm -suggested primitives had accurate naive implementations but faster expert implementations, the speed-up is instead concentrated around moderate accuracy levels between 55%–80%, providing speed-ups of up to 2.2×.6 In short, expert implementations of GrowLibm -suggested primitives enable substantial speedups at a wide range of accuracies. The GrowLibm -suggested primitives also enable lower error than Herbie could achieve on its own. Figure 8 demonstrates this by plotting the minimum error achieved by Herbie on each kernel across all three applications where Herbie uses at least one GrowLibm -suggested primitive. On almost all such kernels, error is reduced substantially, showing that the GrowLibm -suggested and expert-implemented primitives not only improve speedup at any given level of error but also enable lower error than Herbie could achieve on its own. For a few kernels error does increase, likely due to how the GrowLibm -suggested library primitives affect Herbie’s internal search process, but these increases are small, whereas reductions are often dramatic. For example, in the init-K 

block from PROJ, expert implementations of GrowLibm -suggested library primitives like invgud 

and log1pmd enable a reduction from roughly 28 bits of error (about 44% error, or 56% accuracy), nearly unusable unless |𝜙 | and |𝜙 𝑝 | are close to 1, to roughly 4 bits of error (about 6% error, or 94% accuracy). Herbie measures error in bits, where each bit of error corresponds to one bit of the result being unreliable; Figure 8 plots error as a percentage of the 64-bit result, i.e., bits of error divided by 64. 

6.5 RQ5: Can Learned Primitives Be Deployed in Compiled Applications? 

RQ1–RQ4 demonstrate that GrowLibm ’s primitives are useful at the kernel level; this question asks whether they can also be recognized and deployed in compiled application code. 

> 6

CoolProp sees slight slow-downs at some accuracies; we believe this is mostly noise, resulting from the GrowLibm -suggested primitives causing Herbie to explore its search space differently. A user could, of course, run Herbie multiple times with different seeds, or with and without GrowLibm -suggested kernels, and pick the best implementation. , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 17 init-K 

> forward-
> phip
> forward-U
> seraz0-
> fc-a2
> forward-
> u-atan
> seraz0-
> fc-c1
> pj_tsfn
> spherical-
> inv-longitude
> forward-
> xy-y
> forward-
> xy-x
> inverse-
> lambda
> forward-
> gfi
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> Error (%)

PROJ 

> vanilla
> growlibm forward-y
> init-v-
> pole-n
> inverse-
> con
> inverse-
> delp
> forward-
> tanph
> forward-
> tanlog
> exact-
> forward-tanCe
> forward-
> phidp
> exact-forward-
> two-inv-denom
> forward-
> ellipsoid-logratio
> exact-inv-
> Cn-angle
> spherical-
> fwd-x-from-b
> forward-v 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Error (%)

PROJ 

> vanilla
> growlibm clMeanOscMap-
> di
> clMeanOscMap-
> MpopOp
> clMeanOscMap-
> edM
> clMeanOscMap-
> de1
> clMeanOscMap-
> ap
> clMeanOscMap-
> dOmega
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Error (%)

Basilisk 

> vanilla
> growlibm d2DELTAbi-
> dDelta2
> d2DELTA-
> dDelta2
> DELTA
> d3DELTAbi-
> dTau3
> dtheta-
> dDelta
> theta
> d3theta-
> dDelta3 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Error (%)

CoolProp 

> vanilla
> growlibm

Fig. 8. Lowest error achieved by Herbie for kernels in all three target applications that use GrowLibm -suggested library primitives. Error is reported as a percentage of the 64-bit result (bits of error divided by 64); lower is better. PROJ kernels are split into two charts (high-error and low-error) for readability. GrowLibm -suggested library primitives enable dramatic reductions in error for most kernels. 

Testing whole-application performance requires integrating with the target application build system. Since doing so with Herbie would be exceptionally challenging, we instead developed an LLVM pass that rewrites LLVM IR to use GrowLibm -selected primitives. Like Herbie, this pass can apply algebraic identities and rewrites, though it is necessarily more limited due to operating inside the LLVM compilation pipeline. 

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 18 Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha 

Projection log1pmd invgud hypot Total krovak 0 0 0 0omerc 1 1 0 2som 0 1 4 5somerc 8 10 0 18 tmerc 1 0 0 1Total 10 12 4 26 

Fig. 9. Number of replacements performed by the prototype LLVM pass for various GrowLibm -selected primitives across five PROJ projections: Krovak (krovak), Oblique Mercator (omerc), Space Oblique Mercator (som), Swiss Oblique Mercator (somerc), and Transverse Mercator (tmerc). krovak omerc som somerc tmerc 

> 6
> 4
> 2
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> Speedup vs baseline (%)
> +0.00%
> +5.13%
> -3.89%
> -6.52%
> +0.13%
> PROJ Speedup with LLVM Matcher

Fig. 10. Speedup for five PROJ projections, compiled using our prototype LLVM pass and tested across 10,000,000 points. Higher is better. 

The pass runs on each LLVM basic block, iterating over each IR instruction and uses LLVM’s pattern matcher to select specific floating-point instructions. For each instruction, we compare the instruction DAG rooted at that instruction to a sequence of patterns and, if it matches, rewrite it to a call to one of the GrowLibm -selected primitives. The patterns allow for floating-point reassociation and distribution laws; for example, the expression (2𝑥 + 𝜋 )/ 4 (part of invgud ) is often optimized to 0.5𝑥 + 𝜋 /4 or fma (𝑥, 0.5, 𝜋 /4), where 𝜋 /4 is a constant. Our LLVM pass matches against all of these patterns. When a match is found, the instruction is replaced with a call instruction naming the corresponding GrowLibm -suggested library primitive. We emphasize that this LLVM pass is a prototype, far more limited than Herbie itself, and incorporated only the three GrowLibm -selected primitives relevant to PROJ ( log1pmd , invgud , and hypot ). It also made no attempts to incorporate a cost model, unlike Herbie. The results with this LLVM pass are therefore intended to demonstrate that GrowLibm -selected primitives can be recognized and deployed in compiled applications, with measurable effects on both speed and accuracy. Figure 9 counts how many replacements the pass performed across the five projections. The matcher found 26 use sites, fewer than the corresponding Herbie uses in Figure 6 because pattern matching in LLVM IR is fundamentally more limited than superoptimization. We built the PROJ application using our new LLVM pass, linked it against our library of expert implementations, and connected the result to a driver program that executes the five cartographic projections with 10 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.

Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 19 PROJ total time: 2h 44m 35s Filter Iteration 1 Filter Iteration 2           

> initial superoptimization
> 4m 6s
> deduplication
> 50m 24s
> urgency ranking
> 10m 36s
> implication pass
> 14m 41s
> urgency ranking
> 28m 16s
> implication pass
> 37m 50s
> final superoptimization
> 18m 42s

Basilisk total time: 1h 58m 54s Filter Iteration 1 Filter Iteration 2           

> initial superoptimization
> 2m 0s
> deduplication
> 34m 57s
> urgency ranking
> 12m 44s
> implication pass
> 28m 28s
> urgency ranking
> 12m 54s
> implication pass
> 22m 27s
> final superoptimization
> 5m 24s

CoolProp total time: 1h 47m 52s Filter Iteration 1 Filter Iteration 2           

> initial superoptimization
> 1m 48s
> deduplication
> 32m 1s
> urgency ranking
> 14m 6s
> implication pass
> 20m 28s
> urgency ranking
> 16m 36s
> implication pass
> 19m 29s
> final superoptimization
> 3m 24s

Fig. 11. Timeline of GrowLibm ’s stages on the PROJ, Basilisk, and CoolProp applications. 

million points each. We then measured the runtime of the resulting program on an Apple M3 Pro Macbook Pro with 18 GB of RAM, running macOS 15.3.1 and compiling with Apple Clang 17.0.0. Figure 10 shows the results. The Oblique Mercator (omerc) and Transverse Mercator (tmerc) projections see speedups of 5.1% and 0.1% respectively, while also benefiting from the higher accuracy of the GrowLibm -selected primitive implementations. These are straight wins: faster and 

more accurate. The Space Oblique Mercator (som) and Swiss Oblique Mercator (somerc), which have more replacement sites (5 and 18 respectively, mostly invgud ), see slowdowns of 3.9% and 

6.5% . This is because invgud ’s expert implementation is substantially more accurate but slower than the naive code it replaces. Whether this accuracy-for-speed tradeoff is worthwhile is an application-level decision; for a cartographic library where geospatial accuracy matters, it may well be. The Krovak (krovak) projection had no replacement sites and saw no change. In short, the LLVM matcher demonstrates that GrowLibm -selected primitives can be recognized and deployed in compiled applications, with measurable effects on both speed and accuracy. Integrating the LLVM pass with a cost model could allow it to selectively apply replacements only where the tradeoff is favorable. 

6.6 RQ6: How long does GrowLibm take to run? 

For GrowLibm to be practical, the full pipeline must run in reasonable time. 

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 20 Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha 

Figure 11 shows GrowLibm ’s runtime on the three case studies. The longest run, on PROJ, takes a little under three hours. We found this runtime acceptable for the task at hand: implementing the selected primitives would surely take longer—in fact, just testing them on billions of inputs took us longer—and would not need to be repeated often. Figure 11 further subdivides that runtime into seven separate steps: initial superoptimization with Herbie, dumping all generated candidates; candidate deduplication, which is the slowest single step; two selection stages, each requiring urgency ranking and implication passes; and then a final superoptimization using the selected primitives. This subdivision highlights the importance of GrowLibm ’s size, urgency, and frequency heuristics, which dramatically reduce the number of superoptimizations needed for the two selection stages and thus the time taken by GrowLibm . The two selection stages already take up a majority of GrowLibm ’s running time. We project that a simple greedy selection algorithm, as described in Section 4, would take several weeks in the same circumstances. Note that for PROJ, the second selection stage, and the final superoptimization, are substantially slower than the first selection stage and initial superoptimization. This is due to the optimistic accuracy models used for selected candidates: GrowLibm uses the Rival interval arithmetic library inside these cost models, which adds substantial runtime. 

7 Related Work 

This section reviews prior work on library learning, math library synthesis, egraph-based systems, and superoptimizers, and clarifies how our work relates to and differs from these lines of research. 

7.1 Library Learning 

Library learning is a technique for extracting common structure from a corpus of input programs. Dreamcoder [ 14 ] uses library learning to generate abstractions that can then be used to solve other tasks. It uses version spaces [ 28 ] to efficiently store the corpus of programs. Subsequent work on library learning [ 6 ] has used egraph-based anti-unification for candidate generation, incorporating equational theories to make library learning more robust to syntactic changes. It also uses an egraph extraction algorithm that relies on common subexpression elimination. Stitch [ 4] is another library learning tool that provides optimality guarantees about the discovered abstractions but does not support equational theories. GrowLibm uses a generate and select loop to learn abstractions, similar to prior tools [6]. While library learning finds abstractions from a set of programs, prior work has also focused on other forms of abstraction discovery. For example, Shapemod [ 23 ] learns macros for expressing 3D shapes and Szalinski [ 32 ] uses egraph-based rewriting to discover maps and folds from flattened 3D models. The principle behind tools like Szalinski is similar to GrowLibm in that they leverage program optimization via rewriting to discover new abstractions. 

7.2 Automatic Math Library Generation 

While GrowLibm does not generate implementations of the primitives it suggests, it complements prior work on automatically constructing such implementations. MegaLibm [ 5] presents a domain-specific language for implementing such primitives. The key idea in MegaLibm is the separation of high-level algorithmic structure from low-level floating-point tuning decisions. Other tools like RLIBM [ 29 , 41 ] automatically generate implementations of correctly-rounded math library functions using linear programming. These systems focus on how to implement a chosen primitive. GrowLibm addresses the or-thogonal and earlier problem of which primitives to implement to begin with. This highlights 

GrowLibm ’s utility in conjunction with automatic implementation tools.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 21

7.3 Synthesis and Optimization using E-graphs 

The egraph data structure, which was originally developed for efficiently representing congruence relations in theorem provers [ 34 ], has been shown to be effective for program optimization via equality saturation [ 55 ]. The egg library [ 60 ] offers a fast and reusable egraph library that has been used in a wide range of systems [ 6, 14 , 20 , 24 , 32 , 33 , 39 , 40 , 45 , 46 , 51 – 53 , 56 – 58 ]. Even though these systems are from diverse domains, they all leverage equality saturation for tasks like program synthesis, optimization, and equivalence checking. Egraph-driven rewrite rule synthesis tools like Ruler [ 33 ] and Enumo [ 39 ] roughly follow a generate and select loop like GrowLibm . Both Ruler and Enumo target the synthesis of rewrite rules whereas GrowLibm identifies latent mathematical primitives that can expand the frontier of optimal speed-accuracy tradeoffs for kernel implementations. GrowLibm relies heavily on Herbie’s egraph-based features [ 40 ]. Namely, GrowLibm ’s candidate generation uses Herbie’s egraph-based term rewriting to search over equivalent terms, and GrowLibm ’s deduplication uses Herbie’s egraph-based equivalence checking. 

7.4 Superoptimizing Compilers 

A superoptimizing compiler performs a search over a space of programs to generate better code [ 19 , 31 ]. This is in contrast with a normal optimizing compiler which applies a fixed set of transformations. There has been decades of research on developing superoptimizers. Bansal and Aiken [1] developed a superoptimizer for x86 assembly code and relied on exhaustive enu-meration for exploring the space of programs and canonicalization for pruning the search space. STOKE [ 48 , 49 ] is a superoptimizer that relies on stochastic search to effectively search the space of programs. The Denali superoptimizer [ 25 ] first showed how to use egraph-based rewriting to implement a superoptimizer. Souper [ 47 ] is a middle-end superoptimizer for LLVM. It uses program synthesis to discover concrete optimizations and relies on clever caching of synthesized results for scalability. Minotaur [ 30 ] builds on Souper and uses program synthesis to search for low-cost components. GrowLibm ’s key idea is to repurpose machinery that is common to superoptimizers to discover reusable primitives that can unlock better implementations of multiple kernels. This, to the best of our knowledge, has not been explored in prior work. 

8 Conclusion 

This paper formulates numerical library learning: given a workload of floating-point kernels, which new primitives are worth expert implementation? Numerical superoptimizers turn out to already have the right machinery for this problem. Their search enumerates candidates, their equivalence reasoning deduplicates and generalizes, and their cost models estimate counterfactual utility. GrowLibm puts this observation to work by repurposing Herbie as a library learner. Across PROJ, CoolProp, and Basilisk, GrowLibm identifies compact primitives like log1pmd ,

invgud , and pow1ms that an expert can implement using standard numerical techniques. Herbie reuses these implementations extensively, expanding the speed/accuracy frontier by up to 2.2× at fixed accuracy and improving accuracy from 56 .0% to 93 .5% in the best case. A prototype LLVM matcher shows that learned primitives can also be recognized and deployed in compiled code. Our approach has clear limitations. GrowLibm ’s ranking heuristics do not fully account for implementation difficulty: two of the suggested primitives ( sinquot and cosquot ) turned out to require prohibitively expensive multi-word arithmetic despite ranking well on frequency, urgency, and size. Incorporating an implementation-difficulty estimate into the ranking could address this. The LLVM deployment prototype lacks a cost model and cannot yet make per-site speed/accuracy tradeoffs; integrating it more closely with Herbie would allow selective deployment where the 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.

22 Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha 

tradeoff is favorable. And while we believe the library-learning framework generalizes beyond numerics, our evaluation uses only Herbie and only numerical workloads. These limitations also suggest directions for future work. The current pipeline requires expert guidance to implement the suggested primitives; code-generation models could partially automate this step, especially for primitives whose implementations follow standard patterns like range reduction and polynomial approximation. Testing library learning with other superoptimizers is also a natural next step. Tools like STOKE [ 48 ] for x86, Souper [ 47 ] and Minotaur [ 30 ] for LLVM IR, and Denali [ 25 ] for egraph-based rewriting all share the core machinery (search, equivalence reasoning, cost models) that GrowLibm repurposes from Herbie. Combining workload-driven primitive discovery with automated implementation via coding models could eventually close the loop entirely: a superoptimizer that not only identifies which primitives would help, but also generates and validates their implementations. At its core, this paper shows that the question of which primitives to build can be answered by the same machinery that optimizes code against existing primitives. In the three workloads we studied, that machinery identified primitives that were compact, reusable, implementable, and genuinely useful. 

A Data Availability Statement 

We will submit GrowLibm ’s source code and the scripts used to produce the results in Section 6 as part of the OOPSLA artifact evaluation process, together with documentation describing how to run them. All benchmarks used in our evaluation are open source. The code, scripts, and benchmark set will be made publicly available. 

References 

[1] Sorav Bansal and Alex Aiken. 2006. Automatic generation of peephole superoptimizers. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (San Jose, California, USA) (ASPLOS XII) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 394–403. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 1168857.1168906 [2] Ian H. Bell, Jorrit Wronski, Sylvain Quoilin, and Vincent Lemort. 2014. Pure and Pseudo-pure Fluid Thermophysical Property Evaluation and the Open-Source Thermophysical Property Library CoolProp. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 53, 6 (2014), 2498–2508. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie4033999 [3] Dorra Ben Khalifa, Matthieu Martel, and Assale Adjé. 2020. POP: A Tuning Assistant for Mixed-Precision Floating-Point Computations. In Formal Techniques for Safety-Critical Systems (FTSCS 2019) (Communications in Computer and Information Science, Vol. 1165) . Springer, 77–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-46902-3_5 [4] Matthew Bowers, Theo X. Olausson, Lionel Wong, Gabriel Grand, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Kevin Ellis, and Armando Solar-Lezama. 2023. Top-Down Synthesis for Library Learning. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7, POPL, Article 41 (Jan. 2023), 32 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3571234 [5] Ian Briggs, Yash Lad, and Pavel Panchekha. 2024. Implementation and Synthesis of Math Library Functions. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 8, POPL, Article 32 (jan 2024), 28 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3632874 [6] David Cao, Rose Kunkel, Chandrakana Nandi, Max Willsey, Zachary Tatlock, and Nadia Polikarpova. 2023. babble: Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-unification. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7, POPL, Article 14 (Jan. 2023), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3571207 [7] Sylvain Chevillard, Mioara Joldeş, and Christoph Lauter. 2010. Sollya: An Environment for the Development of Numerical Codes. In Proceedings of the Third International Congress on Mathematical Software (ICMS’10) . Springer-Verlag, 28–31. [8] Wei-Fan Chiang, Mark Baranowski, Ian Briggs, Alexey Solovyev, Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, and Zvonimir Rakamarić. 2017. Rigorous Floating-point Mixed-precision Tuning (POPL) . 300–315. https://doi.org/10.1145/3009837.3009846 [9] Nasrine Damouche and Matthieu Martel. 2017. Salsa: An automatic tool to improve the numerical accuracy of programs 

(AFM) .[10] Nasrine Damouche, Matthieu Martel, and Alexandre Chapoutot. 2017. Improving the Numerical Accuracy of Programs by Automatic Transformation. International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer 19, 4 (2017), 427–448. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-016-0435-0 , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 23 

[11] Nasrine Damouche, Matthieu Martel, Pavel Panchekha, Jason Qiu, Alex Sanchez-Stern, and Zachary Tatlock. 2016. Toward a Standard Benchmark Format and Suite for Floating-Point Analysis. (July 2016). [12] Eva Darulova and Viktor Kuncak. 2014. Sound Compilation of Reals (POPL) . 14 pages. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/ 2535838.2535874 [13] Arnab Das, Ian Briggs, Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, Sriram Krishnamoorthy, and Pavel Panchekha. 2020. Scalable yet Rigorous Floating-Point Error Analysis. In 2020 SC20: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC) . IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/ SC41405.2020.00055 [14] Kevin Ellis, Catherine Wong, Maxwell Nye, Mathias Sablé-Meyer, Lucas Morales, Luke Hewitt, Luc Cary, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2021. DreamCoder: bootstrapping inductive program synthesis with wake-sleep library learning. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Virtual, Canada) (PLDI 2021) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 835–850. https://doi.org/10.1145/3453483.3454080 [15] Oliver Flatt, Samuel Coward, Max Willsey, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha. 2022. Small Proofs from Congruence Closure. In Proceedings of the 22nd Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD) . TU Wien Academic Press, 75–83. https://doi.org/10.34727/2022/isbn.978-3-85448-053-2_13 [16] Oliver Flatt and Pavel Panchekha. 2023. Making Interval Arithmetic Robust to Overflow. In 2023 IEEE 30th Symposium on Computer Arithmetic (ARITH) . 44–47. https://doi.org/10.1109/ARITH58626.2023.00022 [17] Oliver Flatt and Yihong Zhang. 2023. egglog In Practice: Automatically Improving Floating-point Error. In EGRAPHS 2023: E-Graph Research, Applications, Practices, and Human-factors Symposium . https://effect.systems/doc/egraphs-2023-egglog/paper.pdf [18] FPBench Project. 2021. FPCore 2.0: The Standard Floating-Point Benchmark Format. https://fpbench.org/spec/fpcore-2.0.html Accessed March 2026. [19] Christopher W. Fraser. 1979. A compact, machine-independent peephole optimizer. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (San Antonio, Texas) (POPL ’79) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/567752.567753 [20] Bo-Yuan Huang, Steven Lyubomirsky, Yi Li, Mike He, Gus Henry Smith, Thierry Tambe, Akash Gaonkar, Vishal Canumalla, Andrew Cheung, Gu-Yeon Wei, Aarti Gupta, Zachary Tatlock, and Sharad Malik. 2024. Application-level Validation of Accelerator Designs Using a Formal Software/Hardware Interface. ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst. 

29, 2, Article 35 (Feb. 2024), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3639051 [21] Arnault Ioualalen and Matthieu Martel. 2012. Sardana: An Automatic Tool for Numerical Accuracy Optimization. In 

15th GAMM-IMACS International Symposium on Scientific Computing, Computer Arithmetic and Validated Numerics (SCAN) .[22] Anastasiia Izycheva and Eva Darulova. 2017. On sound relative error bounds for floating-point arithmetic (FMCAD) .15–22. https://doi.org/10.23919/FMCAD.2017.8102236 [23] R. Kenny Jones, David Charatan, Paul Guerrero, Niloy J. Mitra, and Daniel Ritchie. 2021. ShapeMOD: macro operation discovery for 3D shape programs. ACM Trans. Graph. 40, 4, Article 153 (July 2021), 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3450626.3459821 [24] R. Kenny Jones, Paul Guerrero, Niloy J. Mitra, and Daniel Ritchie. 2023. ShapeCoder: Discovering Abstractions for Visual Programs from Unstructured Primitives. ACM Trans. Graph. 42, 4, Article 49 (July 2023), 17 pages. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3592416 [25] Rajeev Joshi, Greg Nelson, and Keith Randall. 2002. Denali: a goal-directed superoptimizer. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2002 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Berlin, Germany) (PLDI ’02) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 304–314. https://doi.org/10.1145/512529.512566 [26] Patrick W. Kenneally, Scott Piggott, and Hanspeter Schaub. 2020. Basilisk: A Flexible, Scalable and Modular Astrody-namics Simulation Framework. Journal of Aerospace Information Systems 17, 9 (2020). https://doi.org/10.2514/1.I010762 [27] Bhargav Kulkarni and Pavel Panchekha. 2025. Mixing Condition Numbers and Oracles for Accurate Floating-point Debugging. In 2025 IEEE 32nd Symposium on Computer Arithmetic (ARITH) .[28] Tessa A. Lau, Pedro Domingos, and Daniel S. Weld. 2000. Version Space Algebra and its Application to Programming by Demonstration. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML ’00) . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 527–534. [29] Jay P. Lim and Santosh Nagarakatte. 2021. High performance correctly rounded math libraries for 32-bit floating point representations. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Virtual, Canada) (PLDI 2021) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 359–374. https://doi.org/10.1145/3453483.3454049 [30] Zhengyang Liu, Stefan Mada, and John Regehr. 2024. Minotaur: A SIMD-Oriented Synthesizing Superoptimizer. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 8, OOPSLA2, Article 326 (Oct. 2024), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3689766 , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. 24 Jonas Regehr, Mitch Briles, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha 

[31] Henry Massalin. 1987. Superoptimizer: a look at the smallest program. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Architectual Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Palo Alto, California, USA) 

(ASPLOS II) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 122–126. https://doi.org/10.1145/36206.36194 [32] Chandrakana Nandi, Max Willsey, Adam Anderson, James R. Wilcox, Eva Darulova, Dan Grossman, and Zachary Tatlock. 2020. Synthesizing structured CAD models with equality saturation and inverse transformations. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (London, UK) (PLDI 2020) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 31–44. https://doi.org/10.1145/3385412.3386012 [33] Chandrakana Nandi, Max Willsey, Amy Zhu, Yisu Remy Wang, Brett Saiki, Adam Anderson, Adriana Schulz, Dan Grossman, and Zachary Tatlock. 2021. Rewrite rule inference using equality saturation. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 5, OOPSLA, Article 119 (Oct. 2021), 28 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3485496 [34] Charles Gregory Nelson. 1979. Techniques for Program Verification . Ph. D. Dissertation. Stanford University. [35] Dr. K-C Ng. 1993. FDLIBM. http://www.netlib.org/fdlibm/readme [36] Takeshi Ogita, Siegfried M. Rump, and Shin’ichi Oishi. 2005. Accurate Sum and Dot Product. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 26, 6 (2005), 1955–1988. https://doi.org/10.1137/030601818 [37] Open Source Geospatial Foundation. [n. d.]. PROJ. https://proj.org/ Accessed March 2026. [38] OSGeo. [n. d.]. Open Source Geospatial Foundation. https://www.osgeo.org/ Accessed March 2026. [39] Anjali Pal, Brett Saiki, Ryan Tjoa, Cynthia Richey, Amy Zhu, Oliver Flatt, Max Willsey, Zachary Tatlock, and Chan-drakana Nandi. 2023. Equality Saturation Theory Exploration à la Carte. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7, OOPSLA2, Article 258 (Oct. 2023), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3622834 [40] Pavel Panchekha, Alex Sanchez-Stern, James R. Wilcox, and Zachary Tatlock. 2015. Automatically Improving Accuracy for Floating Point Expressions (PLDI) .[41] Sehyeok Park, Justin Kim, and Santosh Nagarakatte. 2025. Correctly Rounded Math Libraries without Worrying about the Application’s Rounding Mode. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9, PLDI, Article 229 (June 2025), 24 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3729332 [42] PROJ contributors. [n. d.]. Swiss Oblique Mercator Projection Implementation. https://github.com/OSGeo/PROJ/blob/ master/src/projections/somerc.cpp Accessed March 2026. [43] PROJ contributors. 2025. PROJ Coordinate Transformation Software Library. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5884394 [44] Siyuan Brant Qian, Vimarsh Sathia, Ivan R. Ivanov, Jan Hückelheim, Paul Hovland, and William S. Moses. 2026. Thinking Fast and Correct: Automated Rewriting of Numerical Code through Compiler Augmentation. In Proceedings of the 2026 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO) .[45] Brett Saiki, Jackson Brough, Jonas Regehr, Jesus Ponce, Varun Pradeep, Aditya Akhileshwaran, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha. 2025. Target-Aware Implementation of Real Expressions (ASPLOS 2025) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1069–1083. https://doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707277 [46] Brett Saiki, Oliver Flatt, Chandrakana Nandi, Pavel Panchekha, and Zachary Tatlock. 2021. Combining Precision Tuning and Rewriting. In 2021 IEEE 28th Symposium on Computer Arithmetic (ARITH) .[47] Raimondas Sasnauskas, Yang Chen, Peter Collingbourne, Jeroen Ketema, Gratian Lup, Jubi Taneja, and John Regehr. 2018. Souper: A Synthesizing Superoptimizer. arXiv:1711.04422 [cs.PL] https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.04422 [48] Eric Schkufza, Rahul Sharma, and Alex Aiken. 2013. Stochastic superoptimization. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Houston, Texas, USA) (ASPLOS ’13) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 305–316. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 2451116.2451150 [49] Eric Schkufza, Rahul Sharma, and Alex Aiken. 2014. Stochastic Optimization of Floating Point Programs using Tunable Precision (PLDI ’14) .[50] Alexei Sibidanov, Paul Zimmermann, and Stéphane Glondu. 2022. The CORE-MATH Project. In 2022 IEEE 29th Symposium on Computer Arithmetic (ARITH) . 26–34. https://doi.org/10.1109/ARITH54963.2022.00014 [51] Eytan Singher and Shachar Itzhaky. 2021. Theory Exploration Powered by Deductive Synthesis. In Computer Aided Verification: 33rd International Conference, CAV 2021, Virtual Event, July 20–23, 2021, Proceedings, Part II . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 125–148. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-81688-9_6 [52] Gus Henry Smith, Benjamin Kushigian, Vishal Canumalla, Andrew Cheung, Steven Lyubomirsky, Sorawee Porn-charoenwase, René Just, Gilbert Louis Bernstein, and Zachary Tatlock. 2024. FPGA Technology Mapping Using Sketch-Guided Program Synthesis. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (La Jolla, CA, USA) (ASPLOS ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 416–432. https://doi.org/10.1145/3620665.3640387 [53] Gus Henry Smith, Andrew Liu, Steven Lyubomirsky, Scott Davidson, Joseph McMahan, Michael Taylor, Luis Ceze, and Zachary Tatlock. 2021. Pure tensor program rewriting via access patterns (representation pearl). In Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Machine Programming (Virtual, Canada) (MAPS 2021) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 21–31. https://doi.org/10.1145/3460945.3464953 , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026. Numerical Superoptimization for Library Learning 25 

[54] Robert Tarjan. 1972. Depth-First Search and Linear Graph Algorithms. SIAM J. Comput. 1, 2 (1972), 146–160. https://doi.org/10.1137/0201010 [55] Ross Tate, Michael Stepp, Zachary Tatlock, and Sorin Lerner. 2009. Equality saturation: a new approach to optimization. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (Savannah, GA, USA) (POPL ’09) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 264–276. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 1480881.1480915 [56] Samuel Thomas and James Bornholt. 2024. Automatic Generation of Vectorizing Compilers for Customizable Digital Signal Processors. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (La Jolla, CA, USA) (ASPLOS ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 19–34. https://doi.org/10.1145/3617232.3624873 [57] Alexa VanHattum, Rachit Nigam, Vincent T. Lee, James Bornholt, and Adrian Sampson. 2021. Vectorization for digital signal processors via equality saturation. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Virtual, USA) (ASPLOS ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 874–886. https://doi.org/10.1145/3445814.3446707 [58] Yisu Remy Wang, Shana Hutchison, Jonathan Leang, Bill Howe, and Dan Suciu. 2020. SPORES: sum-product optimiza-tion via relational equality saturation for large scale linear algebra. Proc. VLDB Endow. 13, 12 (July 2020), 1919–1932. https://doi.org/10.14778/3407790.3407799 [59] Wikipedia contributors. [n. d.]. Gudermannian Function. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gudermannian_function Accessed March 2026. [60] Max Willsey, Chandrakana Nandi, Yisu Remy Wang, Oliver Flatt, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha. 2021. egg: Fast and extensible equality saturation. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 5, POPL, Article 23 (Jan. 2021), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3434304 , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2026.