Title: ThermoDSE: A Thermal-Aware and Comprehensive Design Space Exploration for Chiplet-Based DNN Accelerators

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07096v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 00:43:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1

# ThermoDSE: A Thermal-Aware and Comprehensive Design Space Exploration for Chiplet-Based DNN Accelerators 

Jian Peng, Student Member, IEEE , Hanwei Fan, Student Member, IEEE , Jingbo Jiang, Student Member, IEEE , Lin Jiang, Member, IEEE , Wei Zhang, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —Chiplet-based DNN accelerators provide a scalable path to balance performance and yield for modern AI workloads. However, such systems face critical challenges in area and thermal constraints. The design space optimization should jointly consider the fine-grained task modeling, chiplet granularity, core granularity, and critical physical constraints. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first framework that involves all these factors. In this work, we propose ThermoDSE, a thermal-aware and comprehensive design space exploration framework for chiplet-based DNN accelerators. ThermoDSE integrates existing fine-grained modeling techniques into a uniform simulation and optimization framework that jointly considers architecture de-sign, task orchestration, and inter-chiplet communication under strict thermal and area constraints. Experimental results show that ThermoDSE achieves up to 3.5× improvement in Energy-Delay-Inverse-Yield (defined as E × D × Y −1) cost, compared with state-of-the-art Simba and other baselines. Furthermore, relative to simulated annealing and reinforcement learning–based methods, ThermoDSE convert to better design points with 3.7× and 29.4× running time speed up, respectively. 

Index Terms —DNN accelerator, chiplet, thermal aware, task orchestration, optimization. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# CHIPLET technology has recently attracted significant attention from both industry and academia due to the slowing of Moore’s Law. Smaller chiplets benefit from higher fabrication yields and shorter design cycles. By leveraging advanced packaging technologies, multiple chiplets can be integrated into a single package, delivering a flexible, high-performance processor at a reasonable cost. As computing demand for machine learning continues to increase, DNN ac-celerators are designed to meet stringent requirements, includ-ing high throughput, energy efficiency, and reliability. DNN accelerators featuring arrays of processing elements (PEs) have emerged as an efficient platform and have steadily grown in scale. For example, Cerebras [1] employs a wafer-scale accel-erator to deliver cluster-scale throughput. However, such large monolithic dies result in significantly higher manufacturing cost. Moreover, due to their complexity, these accelerators face long development cycles and high non-recurring engineering (NRE) costs [2].       

> Manuscript received XXXX; revised XXXX; accepted XXXX. Data of publication XXXX; Date of current version XXXX. This work is partially funded by Hong Kong RGC GRF XXXX. Corresponding author: Wei Zhang. Jian Peng (jpengai@connect.ust.hk), Hanwei Fan (hfanah@connect.ust.hk), Jingbo Jiang (jjiangan@connect.ust.hk), and Wei Zhang (wei.zhang@ust.hk) are with the Dept. of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Lin Jiang (jianglin1@neu.edu.cn) is with Northeastern University, Shenyang, China.

Chiplet-based DNN accelerators provide a promising solu-tion to these problems. Simba [3], proposed by NVIDIA in 2019, is a 36-chiplet prototype for deep-learning inference. Each chiplet is an NVDLA-like NPU core that achieves a 4-TOPS peak performance within an area of only 2.5 mm ×

2.4 mm , leading to lower manufacturing and NRE costs. Sev-eral advantages arise from splitting a large monolithic DNN accelerator into smaller chiplets. First, smaller dies achieve much higher fabrication yield. Second, scalability improves since the number of chiplets can be easily extended with shorter development cycles. For chiplet-based DNN accelerators, core communica-tion—including the Network-on-Chip (NoC) for intra-chiplet data movement and the Network-on-Package (NoP) for die-to-die communication—provides significant benefits in fine-grained data parallelism and data reuse during workload or-chestration. Several previous studies have focused on dataflow and task-mapping optimization for chiplet-based DNN ac-celerators. Tangram [4] and SET [5] explore layer-pipelined execution to optimize dataflow. Aotmic [6] and Klotski [7] propose graph-level workload orchestration methods. Through precise graph partitioning, scheduling, and mapping, they achieve substantial improvements in performance, hardware utilization, and energy efficiency. Some previous works [8], [9] jointly explore workload orchestration and chiplet design. However, these pioneering works primarily focus on novel encodings of workload orchestration for task scheduling and mapping. Their design space exploration (DSE) of chiplet- and accelerator-level architecture remains limited and incomplete. Chiplet-Gym [10] introduces RL for chiplet optimization and considers comprehensive package-level factors such as yield, packaging cost, and interconnect bandwidth. Nevertheless, it relies on a simple analytical model that ignores chiplet granularity exploration, core-level optimization, and the data reuse enabled by fine-grained modeling. On the other hand, chiplet-based DNN accelerators suffer from severe thermal-wall problems due to higher integration density. These issues should be evaluated and addressed in the early design stage. Unfortunately, none of the above studies considers these critical constraints. Mathur et al. [11] propose a thermal-aware framework for 3D DNN accelerator exploration, but it supports only a single-core accelerator. TESA [12] introduces a temperature-aware methodology that adjusts the sizes and inter-chiplet spacing (ICS) of accelerators to jointly balance cost and performance under area and ther-mal constraints. However, the NPU cores in TESA operate independently without NoC/NoP to simplify the simulation, thereby ignoring core-level optimization and the data reuse arXiv:2607.07096v1 [cs.AR] 8 Jul 2026 JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2Core     

> Computing
> Chiplet
> D2D
> Interface
> IO Chiplet
> DRAM
> (a) Control
> Unit
> DMA
> NoC
> Router
> Communi -
> cation Unit Uniform
> Buffer
> IFM
> Buf
> WEI
> Buf
> OFM
> Buf
> Matrix Unit
> Vector Unit
> Acc RF (b)
> Fig. 1. (a) Diagram of a chiplet-based DNN accelerator, and (b) Architecture of a single NPU core.

benefits of inter-core communication. Therefore, we argue that a comprehensive optimization framework for chiplet-based DNN accelerators should incor-porate the following aspects. Fine-grained task modeling :Due to the presence of NoC/NoP, fine-grained task orchestra-tion can improve performance by over 40% compared with coarse-grained layer-wise scheduling [6]. Moreover, effective task orchestration enables accurate DSE results and precise thermal simulation. Considering multiple constraints : Dur-ing optimization, several constraints must be strictly satisfied. For chiplet designs, both peak temperature and interposer area are tightly regulated. Effective DSE algorithm : The design space of chiplet-based DNN accelerators is enormous, covering both core-level and chiplet-level architectural param-eters. Furthermore, because fine-grained task modeling is time-consuming, the DSE algorithm must efficiently locate near-optimal design points with limited iterations. To bridge these gaps, we develop ThermoDSE , a thermal-aware, comprehensive, and efficient DSE framework for chiplet-based DNN accelerators. We construct a thermal and performance simulator with fine-grained task orchestration to deliver high-performance and accurate simulation results. An effective DSE algorithm based on transductive experimental design (TED) [13] and scalable constrained Bayesian Op-timization (SCBO) [14] is then applied to optimize under multiple constraints. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We build a comprehensive performance and thermal simulation framework that integrates fine-grained task modeling, including μtask-level data reuse and buffering. The simulator provides accurate and efficient results for iterative DSE progress.  

> •

We propose an effective DSE algorithm based on TED and SCBO. The TED-based initialization generates a well-distributed initial sample set across the design space, retaining essential information for surrogate modeling. Meanwhile, the SCBO algorithm extends Bayesian op-timization for multi-constraint scenarios by dynamically adjusting the trust region during each iteration, enabling efficient search around boundary conditions.  

> •

Finally, we validate our methodology by comparing the Energy-Delay-Inverse-Yield (EDYP) cost against in-dustrial product Simba and prior frameworks (TESA and Chiplet-Gym). Experimental results show that our framework achieves up to 3.5x lower EDYP than these baselines. We further demonstrate that the proposed DSE method attains better design points with 3.7x and 29.4x speedup over conventional simulated annealing (SA) and reinforcement learning (RL) based methods, respectively. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the background of chiplet-based DNN accelera-tor design and presents a motivating example. Section III reviews related works. Section IV describes the proposed methodology, including the overall framework, fine-grained task orchestration, modeling, and DSE formulation. Section V presents experimental results and analysis. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and discusses future work. II. B ACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 

A. Chiplet-based Scalable DNN Accelerator 

The chiplet-based scalable DNN accelerator was first in-troduced by NVIDIA’s Simba [3] and has been extensively explored in prior studies [4], [8], [9], [15]. The overall architecture is shown in Fig. 1. The main component of this architecture is a computing NPU core array. Dividing a large monolithic core array into multiple computing chiplets can sig-nificantly reduce both NRE and manufacturing costs. A mesh-based NoC interconnects all computing cores within a chiplet as well as the controller within the I/O chiplets, enabling arbi-trary core-to-core, core-to-DRAM, and DRAM-to-core com-munications. The Network-on-Package (NoP) supports inter-chiplet communication. The die-to-die (D2D) transmitter (TX) within a chiplet encodes the data independently and forwards it to the corresponding D2D receiver (RX) in another chiplet. The D2D RX decodes the incoming data and proceeds with NoC transmission. This inter-chiplet communication is fully automatic and transparent to both the source and destination cores. The I/O chiplet contains an array of I/O modules that interface with DRAM, host systems, or external data sources such as cameras. Fig. 1(b) illustrates the architecture of a single NPU core. Each core typically comprises four main components: a control unit, a communication unit, buffers, a matrix unit, and a vector unit. The control unit manages the operation of the NPU core JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3           

> (a) GoogLeNet (b) BERT (c) AR/VR
> Fig. 2. Thermal distribution of three different workloads on the Simba proto-type: (a) GoogLeNet, with a peak temperature of 61 .3◦C; (b) Transformer, with a peak temperature of 77 .9◦C; and (c) AR/VR workloads composed of six types of DNNs, with a peak temperature of 69 .6◦C.

according to the received instructions. The communication unit handles both inter-core and intra-core data movement through the NoC router and DMA engine, respectively. The uniform buffer ( ubuf ) usually has a large capacity and can store all types of data. The IFM and WEI buffers ( ibuf and wbuf )store input feature maps and weight parameters, respectively. Partial sums and output feature maps (OFMs) are stored in the accumulator register file ( Acc RF ) and OFM buffer, respectively. The matrix unit typically contains a systolic array to perform convolution and matrix multiplication operations, while the vector unit executes layer-specific functions such as activation, pooling, and normalization. 

B. Multi-DNN Workload 

The success of deep learning in recent years has led to breakthrough applications such as augmented and virtual re-ality (AR/VR) [16] and autonomous driving [17]–[19]. These applications typically employ multiple DNNs to perform dis-tinct tasks collaboratively, achieving state-of-the-art system performance. For example, AR/VR applications involve sev-eral types of neural networks, such as image segmentation (U-Net), object detection (MobileNet and Yolo), object recog-nition (ResNet-50 and GoogLeNet), and speech recognition (BERT). These networks are executed sequentially with small batch sizes [20]. However, different types of networks exhibit widely varying power and thermal characteristics. First, models such as BERT and Yolo demand significantly higher computational power than conventional CNNs. Previous studies [21], [22] demon-strated that the sparsity of input feature maps greatly affects matrix-unit power consumption, owing to the zero-bypass mechanism in MAC units. Meanwhile, activation functions such as GLUE in Transformers and LeakyReLU in Yolo rarely induce sparsity compared with ReLU in conventional networks [23]. Second, the attention layers in BERT involve intensive data movement, leading to considerably higher power consumption in communication units. This diversity in DNN characteristics poses substantial challenges for thermal-aware design optimization in chiplet-based DNN accelerators. 

C. Motivations 

Fig. 2 illustrates the thermal distribution across three repre-sentative workloads on the Simba architecture. We analyze       

> (a) D1 (b) D2 (c) D3
> Fig. 3. Possible directions for miminmizing EDYP cost: (a) D1: allocate more resources to reduce the delay. (b) D2: Increase the chiplet granularity and ICS. (c) D3: Reduce core numbers and allocate more resources to each core.

GoogLeNet, BERT, and an AR/VR mixed workload. The lightweight GoogLeNet workload results in a peak temperature of only 61.3 °C, whereas BERT produces a peak tempera-ture that is 16 .6 ◦C higher, due to its dense input data and higher data movement intensity. For the AR/VR application that integrates multiple DNNs, the peak temperature reaches 69.6 °C, falling between the two extremes. Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling [24] is a classical technique to mitigate power consumption in high-power neural networks during runtime. However, in multi-DNN workloads for mobile or edge scenarios, networks are executed sequentially, making DVFS unsuitable due to its long adjustment latency [25]. Obtaining a balanced trade-off among energy, delay, and yield for chiplet-based designs remains highly challenging in mobile or edge scenarios [12], [26]. Fig. 3 presents a moti-vating example illustrating several potential design directions during DSE. We assume the design of a chiplet-based DNN accelerator is constrained by a peak temperature of 75 ◦C and an interposer area of 300 mm 2. In Fig. 3(a), doubling both the computing units and on-chip buffer capacity achieves 1.6×

lower delay, but raises the peak temperature to 84.1 °C. As shown in Fig. 3(b), reducing the chiplet array from 6×6 to 3×3

slightly degrades yield by 0.1 but achieves 1.2× lower energy cost and reduces the peak temperature by 6 °C. Fewer chiplets reduce interposer-level D2D energy and provide greater ICS, improving cooling efficiency. However, the area constraint limits ICS expansion, and the temperature constraint remains violated. Finally, as shown in Fig. 3(c), reducing the number of NPU cores while increasing the resources per core further lowers communication energy and enlarges ICS, satisfying thermal constraints. Nonetheless, utilization of large systolic arrays drops, slightly increasing delay, and larger SRAMs also raise access energy [27]. Therefore, developing a DSE framework that simultaneously considers performance, yield, and physical constraints for chiplet-based DNN accelerators is crucial but non-trivial. III. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Chiplet-Based DNN Accelerator Architecture Exploration 

Recently, several studies have focused on architecture ex-ploration for chiplet-based DNN accelerators. TESA [12] is a design exploration framework for temperature-aware sizing of chiplet-based accelerators. It searches for the optimal size JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4                             

> TABLE I SUMMARY OF CHIPLET -BASED DNN A CCELERATOR OPTIMIZERS
> Work Task Grain. Chiplet Gran. Core Model Const. DSE Method
> [8] Fine ✗✗N.A. Exhaustive [12] Coarse ✗✓T and A SA [9] Fine ✓✗N.A. Exhaustive [10] analytical ✗✗N.A. RL
> Ours Fine ✓✓T and A TED+SCBO
> Note: T and A in Const. column are chip temperature and area, respectively.

of each NPU core and ICS to satisfy temperature, area, and performance constraints through an SA algorithm. Each NPU in TESA operates independently, with its own DRAM channel. However, this architecture is inefficient and impractical for large-scale DNN accelerators because it is unrealistic to allo-cate so many DRAM channels. Moreover, since TESA only supports network-level parallelism, the utilization of chiplets becomes extremely low when the number of networks is smaller than the number of chiplets. Chiplet-Gym [10] is an analytical exploration framework that supports different chiplet integration technologies. Al-though the overall architecture resembles that of Simba, its simple task mapping assumption based on an analytical model cannot capture the detailed characteristics of data reuse and buffer sharing between cores, resulting in inaccurate simula-tion results. Furthermore, the absence of a detailed single-core model further reduces the accuracy of its performance estimation. For chiplet-based DNN accelerator design, a number of works have focused on dataflow and task orchestration op-timizations [4]–[9]. Unfortunately, except for TESA, most of these studies ignore the critical thermal and area constraints inherent in chiplet-based designs. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 3, the granularity of chiplet partitioning has a significant influence on the thermal profile, yet neither TESA nor Chiplet-Gym explicitly considers the chiplet granularity exploration. 

B. DSE Algorithms for Chiplet-Based DNN Accelerators 

NN-Batton [8] and Gemini [9] search exhaustively for opti-mal designs due to a limited design space. TESA [12] employs the SA algorithm to perform design-space exploration under temperature, area, and performance constraints. However, SA often struggles to obtain high-quality design points because it easily becomes trapped in local optima. To alleviate this issue, Chiplet-Gym [10] introduces RL to guide the search process. Nevertheless, RL converges slowly and is extremely time-consuming for fine-grained models involving large design spaces. To overcome these limitations, we propose ThermoDSE , a therma-aware and comprehensive DSE framework for chiplet-based DNN accelerators. The framework supports multi-level modeling, including chiplet-level granularity, fine-grained task orchestration, NPU-core design, and inter-chiplet spacing. An effective DSE algorithm based on TED and SCBO is em-ployed to explore the design space under thermal and area constraints. SCBO dynamically adjusts the trust region during the optimization process, enabling abundant exploration and Ctrl Knob      

> Core -level and Chiplet -level Parameters
> Latency, Energy,
> Yield
> Area and Thermal
> TED+SCBO
> Optimizer
> DRAM Capacity
> & Bandwidth
> Const. (area,
> thermal, …) Target DNNs
> Area
> Energy
> Yield
> Evaluator : models and DAG scheduler
> Task
> Partition
> Task
> Schedule
> Task
> Mapping
> Floorplan Generator and Hotspot
> Power
> Library
> Chiplet -
> level param.
> Core -level
> Param.
> Initial
> Mapping
> Opt.
> Design
> Fig. 4. The complete framework of design space exploration.

accurate identification of optimal design points near constraint boundaries. Table I summarizes existing optimization frameworks for chiplet-based DNN accelerators. Compared with prior works, our proposed framework is more comprehensive and effective. Furthermore, the proposed DSE algorithm achieves superior design points with significantly fewer iterations. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Overall Framework 

The overall framework is illustrated in Fig. 4. Our frame-work aims to obtain the optimal chiplet design for chiplet-based DNN accelerators given the DRAM configuration, de-sign constraints, and target DNN workloads. The final out-puts include: (1) core-level DNN accelerator microarchitec-ture designs, (2) chiplet-level parameters, and (3) an initial thermal-aware task orchestration scheme that satisfies thermal constraint. The performance evaluator estimates energy, latency, and yield based on the candidate design, task orchestration, and reference library. To evaluate thermal behavior, we employ HotSpot 6.0 [28], which estimates the steady-state tempera-ture distribution using the provided power map and chiplet floorplan. 

B. Fine-grained Task Orchestration 

Task orchestration in chiplet-based DNN accelerators in-volves complex optimization and has been widely explored in prior works. Among existing methods, graph-based orchestra-tion has attracted significant attention due to its capability to support fine-grained ( μtask-level) parallelism, maximize data reuse, and achieve high core utilization [6], [7]. This approach is particularly effective for small batch sizes (typically ≤ 2). Therefore, we adopt the graph-based orchestration approach from [6] as the foundation of our framework. The basic process, illustrated in Fig. 5, includes four steps: (1) layer partitioning: partition the original layers into several 

μtasks. (2) μtask-directed acyclic graph (DAG) generation. (3) scheduling: select a batch of μtasks at execution round. And (4) mapping: assign the selected μtasks to a specific NPU core. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5

In our implementation, we use utilization-directed partition-ing and dynamic programming (DP)-based scheduling to re-duce complexity. The original neural network (NN) workload is represented as a DAG, where each depth level contains one or more layers. During the partitioning stage, all layers at the same depth are initially divided into n μ tasks, where 

n corresponds to the number of DNN cores. For each layer 

li, the number of assigned μtasks ( ni) is determined by its computational load ratio with respect to the total workload of that depth. When the ubuf capacity is insufficient for the data volume of a μtask, ni is increased to ensure feasibility. For CONV and GEMM tensors, the partitioning priority for tensor dimensions follows b → h → w → co and b → h → w,respectively, where b, h, w, and co denote batch size, height of OFM, width of OFM, and output channels. Hence, the μtask DAG can be formulated as in Equations 1-3. 

G = {V, E }, (1) 

V = {μtask l,x,b : [( hs, h e), (ws, w e), (cis, c ie), (cos, c oe)] }, (2) 

E = {el,x,m,y : μtask l,x → μtask m,y }, (3) where l, m are the indices of layer in an NN, x, y are the indice of the μtasks. In the DAG, each vertex μtask l,x,b 

represents the μtask x in layer l that processes the ouput feature map with the shape of height from hs to he, width from 

ws to we, input channel from cis to cie, and output channel cos

to coe, respectively. while each edge encodes data dependencies among μtasks. At each iteration, the scheduler selects at most n μ tasks to execute in parallel. The DP-based iterative search is adopted for μtask scheduling, following [6], as it achieves high per-formance with low complexity. The scheduling priority is determined by the following rules: (1) μtasks from the same layer are prioritized to maximize reuse of input feature maps and weights already stored in on-chip buffers. (2) μtasks from layers at the same depth are scheduled earlier to release buffer capacity promptly, as they usually share common input data. 

(3) If some NPU cores remain idle after scheduling tasks of the current depth, additional μ-tasks with satisfied dependencies are then selected. This iterative process continues until all 

μtasks are executed. Task mapping assigns each selected μtask to a specific NPU core, which significantly impacts both performance and thermal characteristics. Prior studies [6], [7] employed dy-namic programming or mixed-integer linear programming for mapping optimization, yet they neglected the thermal implica-tions of the mapping decisions. Due to lateral heat conduction between cores, placing high-power tasks on centrally located cores can induce severe temperature hotspots. To mitigate this effect, we introduce a greedy-based thermal-aware mapping strategy. NPU cores located near the center suffer the most from lateral heat accumulation, whereas corner cores experience the least. Consequently, the highest-power 

μtasks are preferentially mapped to the corner cores, while lower-power μtasks are assigned to the center cores. This fine-grained task orchestration enables sophisticated data buffering mechanisms, including inter-core data reuse and data sharing. During each round, output data are written ℎ𝑖                                  

> ℎ𝑖 +1
> 3x3 CONV
> 3x3 CONV 1x1 CONV
> 1-11-21-32-1
> 1-51-61-7
> 3-13-2
> 3-33-4
> 4-14-24-34-4
> ℎ𝑖
> ℎ𝑖 +1
> Depth 1
> Depth 2
> Depth 3
> #Round 1234
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 1-11-21-31-4
> 1-51-6
> 2-13-13-23-3
> 3-44-14-24-3
> 4-4
> #Core
> (a) Residual layer block (b) Partition and generate DAG (c) Schedule and mapping
> 1-8
> 1-4
> 1-71-8
> 5
> Fig. 5. The basic progress of task orchestration. The example is a ResNet block structure mapping into a tiled accelerator with 2×2DNN cores.

back to the uniform buffer for use in subsequent computations. Data sharing allows stored data to be reused by other cores when required. Compared with coarse-grained simulators such as TESA [12] and Chiplet-Gym [10], our fine-grained or-chestration and buffering more accurately capture data-reuse opportunities, thereby substantially reducing DRAM accesses. A Last-in-Fist-out (LIFO) write-back policy is applied in our uniform buffer management: when insufficient space remains for incoming μtasks, the most recently stored output feature map data are iteratively written back to DRAM until sufficient buffer space is available. 

C. Performance, Power, Area, and Thermal Models 

1) Latency Model: The total delay D is calculated as the sum of the delay of the target DNN workloads, as shown in Equation 4. 

D =

> W

X

> w=1

Dw, (4) where W is the number of NNs in the workload and Dw is the delay of an NN. For each NN, given the generated DAG and task-mapping scheme, its delay Dw is obtained by summing the delays of all scheduling rounds, as shown in Equation 5, 

Dw =

> R

X

> r=1

Dr , (5) where R denotes the total number of scheduling rounds and 

Dr is the delay of a scheduling round. The delay of each round is determined by the maximum latency among all NPU cores, as given in Equation 6, 

Dr = max {D1, D 2, . . . , D n}, (6) where n is the number of NPU cores. The execution of an NPU core consists of three main phases: (1) fetching IFM and WEI data from DRAM or other NPU cores, (2) reading data to matrix unit or vector unit and writing back output into uniform buffer, and (3) writing the OFM data back to DRAM. A core can start computation only after all required data are loaded into local buffers. However, data write-back can be JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6

pipelined with computation. Therefore, the delay of an NPU core is given by Equation 7, 

Dn = Din + max( Dexe , D out ), (7) where Din , Dexe , and Dout represent the delays of input data movement, execution, and output write-back, respectively. Both Din and Dout are related to data transfer bandwidth on DRAM and data volume of interconnect links. For chiplet-based DNN accelerators, data transfers occur through two paths: the DRAM interface and the NoC/NoP interconnects. The overall data movement delay ( Dmove ) is determined by the slower (maximum) phase between DRAM (DDRAM ) and NoC/NoP interconnects ( Dnocp ), as shown in Equation 8, 

Dmove = max {DDRAM , D nocp }. (8) The DRAM latency equals the total data volume divided by the bandwidth. For NoC/NoP, we moniter the data volume of each connection link. The latency of inter-core communication depends on the most congested NoC/NoP link, as shown in Equation 9, 

Dnocp = V ol max 

bw nocp 

, (9) where V ol max is the data volumn of most congested link and 

bw nocp is the bandwidth of NoC/NoP, consistent with prior works [4]–[7], [9]. 

Detailed Core-Level Execution Model: As shown in Fig. 1(b), the execution of an NPU core involves four main steps: (1) transferring input data from the uniform buffer to IFM and WEI buffers, (2) computation through matrix or vector units, (3) writing OFM data back to the uniform buffer, and (4) DRAM write-back. The data movement of different buffers is refered to SET [5] and Gemini [9]. Due to the limited capacity of IFM and WEI buffers, only partial input data can be loaded at once. To maximize data reuse, the hardware selectively fixes either IFM or WEI data depending on reuse frequency and required buffer size. The maximal reuse factor is constrained by the depth of the accumulator register file ( Acc RF ). Consequently, the cor-responding buffer access volumes can be derived accordingly. Except for the uniform buffer, all on-chip buffers are double-buffered to enable overlapping data access and computation. Hence, the delay of NPU core ( Dexe ) execution comprises two components: computing delay Dcomp and on-chip data transfer delay Dbuf . As presented in Equation 10, the effective core delay is determined by their maximum. 

Dcore = max( Dcomp , D ubuf ). (10) The buffer delay equals the accessed data volume divided by the buffer port bit-width, as defined in Equation 11. 

Dbuf = V ol bw buf 

, (11) where the Dbuf is the delay of on-chip buffer, V ol is the data volume of access, and bw buf is the bit-wdith of this buffer. Unlike previous works that neglect the utilization of matrix units, our model explicitly accounts for it. Each NPU core integrates a weight-stationary systolic-array matrix unit and a MAC-tree-based vector unit. The systolic array is configured as hsa × wsa , while the vector unit comprises wsa computing units to maintain consistent bitwidth. For matrxi unit, the total computation delay is expressed in Equation 12, 

Dcomp = #ops 

#P E × uhsa × uwsa × uosa 

, (12) where the #ops is the total operations of GEMM and CONV computing, #P E is the number of PEs in systolic array, and 

uhsa , u wsa , u osa are the utlizations of height, width, and output shape dimensions, respectively. In each computation batch, systolic arrays are constrained to process output matrix with shapes of hsa × wsa . Non-aligned dimensions must be padded with zeros, following standard systolic array imple-mentations [29], [30]. For CONV μtasks ( h × w × ci × co) and GEMM tasks ( M × K × N ), utilization factors are defined in Equations 13–15. 

uhsa =

( ci 

> hsa

/⌈ ci 

> hsa

⌉, for CONV μtasks  

> Khsa

/⌈ Khsa ⌉, for GEMM μtasks (13) 

uwsa =

( co 

> wsa

/⌈ co 

> wsa

⌉, for CONV μtasks  

> Nwsa

/⌈ Nwsa ⌉, for GEMM μtasks (14) 

uosa =

( howo 

> hsa

/⌈ howo 

> hsa

⌉, for CONV μtasks  

> Mhsa

/⌈ Mhsa ⌉. for GEMM μtasks (15) For weight-stationary systolic array, input channel of CONV 

ci and the column of left matrix K of GEMM should align with the height of systolic array. The loop will execute ⌈ ci 

> hsa

⌉

times. If the remaining input channel is less than the height of systolic array, part of PEs will not work. Similarly, the output channel of CONV co and the column of right matrix N

should align with width of systolic array. In addition, ho × wo

of CONV and row M of GEMM should also align height of systolic array, since it can only handle hsa rows each time. For element-wise and pooling layers executed on the vector unit, utilization follows the same formulation as Equation 14, since there are wsa computing unit in vector unit. 

2) Energy Model: The total energy consumption E is the sum of energy consumption of target DNN workloads, as shown in Equation 16. 

E =

> W

X

> w=1

Ew. (16) For each NN, the energy cost Ew is analytically modeled as the sum of DRAM, computation cores, and communication energy, as shown in Equation 17. 

Ew = EDRAM + Ecore + Ecomm . (17) Communication energy includes both NoC and NoP compo-nents. Because NoC links are clock-gated when idle, their energy usage follows Equation 18. 

Eops = # ops × eops , (18) where the #ops the number of a type of operation and eops 

is energy cost of this type of operation. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7BEOL      

> IO Die
> BEOL BEOL
> Core Core IO Die
> BEOL
> Comp
> Die
> BEOL
> Core Core Comp.
> Die
> Heat Spreader
> Heat Sink
> Interposer
> TIM
> Fig. 6. Cross-sectional view of a chiplet-based DNN accelerator. Each compute die contains multiple DNN cores connected via an on-die NoC, while die-to-die links are realized through micro-bumps, BEOL interconnects, and an interposer.

For D2D links in NoP, energy consumption depends on the interconnect type. Clock-embedded D2D (e.g., SerDes [31]– [33]) recovers the clock from data and consumes, hence the energy cost can be E = # D2D×PD2D ×Latency. In contrast, clock-forwarding D2D (e.g., GRS [34], [35], UCIe [36]) employs a dedicated clock channel and can enter low-power states when idle; its energy is modeled similarly to on-chip NoC links using Equation 18. This work focuses on the latter type, consistent with existing systems such as Simba [3], NN-Baton [8], and Chiplet-Gym [10]. In addition to NoP, the energy cost of modules such as NoC, buffers, and computing unit, are also based on the Equation 18. The average power is derived from the energy cost divided by the total latency, as shown in Equation 19, where m is a module in chiplet-based DNN accelerators, D is the total delay, and Pclk is the period of clock. 

P mavg = Em

D × Pclk 

. (19) 

3) Area and Yield Models: The total system area is computed as Equation 20, 

Atotal =

> xcut −1

X

> i=1
> ycut −1

X

> j=1

AICS +

> XX

X

> i=1
> Y Y

X

> i=1

Acomp + Aio , (20) where xcut and ycut are the chiplet divisions along the X-and Y-directions, XX and Y Y are the core counts along these dimensions, and Aio denotes the I/O die area. Each compute die area Adie consists of the matrix unit ( Amtxu ), vector unit ( Avecu ), buffers ( Abuf ), D2D links ( AD2D), and other supporting modules ( Aother ), as formulated in Equation 21. 

Adie = Amtxu + Avecu + Abuf + AD2D + Aother . (21) Following Chiplet-Gym [10], we assume these auxiliary mod-ules (control unit, NoC, router, DMA, etc.) account for ap-proximately 30% of the die area. The D2D link area is scaled proportionally to the link bandwidth based on GRS [35]. The I/O die area includes PHY modules such as PCIe, DDR, and D2D, whose sizes are derived from [9]. The die yield Y follows the Negative Binomial model in Equation 22, 

Y =



1 + dA die 

α

−α

, (22) where d denotes the defect density, Adie the die area, and α

the clustering parameter.                       

> TABLE II DESIGN SPACE OF SCALABLE CHIPLET -BASED DNN ACCELERATOR .
> Variable Parameter Value Range
> XX DNN cores in X dimension 1–8 (step 1)
> Y Y DNN cores in Y dimension 1–8 (step 1)
> Xcut Chiplet partition in X dimension 1–8 (step 1)
> Y cut Chiplet partition in Y dimension 1–8 (step 1)
> hsa Systolic array height 16–256 (step 16)
> wsa Systolic array width 16–256 (step 16)
> ICS Inter-chiplet spacing 0.5–3.5 mm (step 0.3 mm)
> ubuf uniform buffer size 128–8192 KB (power of 2)
> N oCP bw NoC/NoP bandwidth 16–256 (step 16)

4) Thermal Model: Thermal behavior is simulated using HotSpot 6.0 [28], taking as input the component-wise average power, floorplan, and material properties. Fig. 6 shows a cross-sectional view of the chiplet-based DNN accelerator. Within each compute die, multiple NPU cores communicate through a mesh NoC. The die-to-die interconnects (NoP) are built in the interposer. Below the compute layers, thermal interface material (TIM) and a heat spreader conduct heat to the external heat sink. We assume NoP power is spatially distributed across the interposer. The thermal properties of TIM, heat spreader, and heat sink are adopted from [12] for realistic modeling. 

D. Early-Stage Design Space Exploration 

In practical chiplet-based system design, the interposer area is typically limited to control manufacturing cost. Meanwhile, peak temperature constraints must be evaluated at an early stage to ensure thermal reliability. Hence, our proposed DSE framework adopts the maximum allowable interposer area and peak temperature as system constraints. Each design configuration must satisfy both constraints simultaneously. Designing a chiplet-based DNN accelerator involves multi-ple trade-offs. Intuitively, increasing the number of computing cores can improve throughput, yet excessive expansion may reduce array utilization due to zero padding once the systolic array height and width exceed optimal limits. Conversely, partitioning a large NPU core into smaller chips improves utilization and yield, but also increases inter-core and inter-chip communication overhead. At the chiplet level, increasing the inter-chiplet spacing alleviates lateral heat coupling but occupies more area. Therefore, an efficient DSE algorithm is essential for identifying optimal architectural configurations that balance these trade-offs. The DES propblem is formulated in Equations 23-24. 

EDY P = E × D × Y −1, (23) 

arg min 

> x∈Ω

EDY P (x) s.t. c1(x) ≤ C1, c 2(x) ≤ C2, (24) where D, E, Y , C1, and C2 denote the total delay, total energy consumption, die yield, peak-temperature constraint, and interposer area constraint, respectively. The DSE engine seeks the optimal design point x within the design space Ω

that minimizes EDY P under the given physical constraints. In mobile and edge scenarios, a lower energy–delay product indicates higher energy efficiency and extended battery life. Accordingly, our DSE objective is formulated as the product of delay, energy, and yield inversely, defined in Equation 23. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8

Algorithm 1 TED (U, μ, b ) 

> 1:

Input: Unsampled design set U, normalization coefficient 

μ, and sample count b 

> 2:

Output: Representative sampled subset χ with |χ| = b 

> 3:

Initialize χ ← ∅ , compute kernel matrix Kuu ′ = f (u, u ′),

∀u, u ′ ∈ U 

> 4:

for i = 1 to b do  

> 5:

Select x∗ = arg max 

> u∈U

Tr [KUx(Kxx + μI)−1KxU] 

> 6:

χ ← χ ∪ x∗, U ← U \ x∗ 

> 7:

K ← K − KUx∗ (Kx∗x∗ + μI)−1Kx∗U 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

return Sampled initialization set χ

Problem (Chiplet-Based DNN Accelerator Design Ex-ploration). Given a design space Ω, each DNN accelerator architecture is represented as a feature vector x. The de-lay–energy–yield triplet ( D, E, Y ) forms the EDY P objective space Y, while peak temperature c1 and interposer area c2

constitute the constraint space C. Through our simulator, for any x, the values of y ∈ Y and {c1, c 2} ∈ C are derived. The optimization goal is to find a set of feature vectors X

minimizing EDY P while all x ∈ X satisfy c1(x) ≤ C1 and 

c2(x) ≤ C2.

Table II summarizes the configurable parameters in our DSE framework, including both chiplet-level and core-level architectural variables. To reduce dimensionality, parameters with low importance are fixed. In detail, the number of vector units equals wsa . The capacity of WEI, IFM, and OFM buffers is set to one-fourth of the uniform buffer, following prior designs such as Simba [3] and DaVinci [37]. The entire design space contains up to one billion potential points. Moreover, incorporating thermal and area constraints increases the complexity of searching for the optimal configuration. To efficiently explore this vast space, we propose ThermoDSE ,an agile and effective optimization framework composed of two phases: (1) active-learning-based initialization and (2) scalable constrained Bayesian optimization. 

1) Active Learning for Initialization : For Bayesian Op-timization, the initial data set can significantly affect the search quality and efficiency. Therefore, obtaining a well-distributed initial dataset is critical for accelerating conver-gence in subsequent optimization. Two principles guide the initialization process: (1) the sampled feature vectors should uniformly cover the design space, and (2) their diversity should adequately represent the architectural variability of that space. Recently, active learning has been widely adopted in DSE due to its ability to generate high-quality and information-rich initial datasets efficiently. The transductive experimental design method [13], [38] has shown promising results in various domains, including high-level synthesis [39], CPU mi-croarchitecture tuning [40], and LLM accelerator design [41]. Inspired by these, we apply TED for the initialization of chiplet-based DNN accelerator DSE. TED selects representative design samples that maximize information coverage by diversifying their mutual distances. Given an unsampled pool U, the algorithm iteratively selects 

Algorithm 2 SCBO( Ω, C 1, C 2, l, n ) 

> 1:

Input: Design space Ω, objective function f (x), constraint functions {ci(x)}2

> i=1

, iteration count T , batch size n,constraints C1, C2 

> 2:

Initialization: x ← T ED (Ω , μ, b ) 

> 3:

Evaluate EDY P and {ci(x)} 

> 4:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 5:

Train GP surrogate models for f (x) and {ci(x)} 

> 6:

Update trust-region length l via Equation 27  

> 7:

xc = arg min x f (x) s.t. c1(x) ≤ C1, c 2(x) ≤ C2 

> 8:

xnext ← CM P S (GP EDY P , {GP ci }, x c, l, n ) 

> 9:

Evaluate EDY P and constraints for xnext  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

return Best feasible configuration x∗ satisfying ci(x∗) ≤

Ci

a subset χ from U that maximizes intra-set diversity. As shown in LINE 4-7 of Algorithm 1, TED will select a feature vector 

x∗ that can maximize the diversity of sampling set from the unsample space at each iteration. 

2) Scalable Constrained Bayesian Optimization : The DSE algorithm must satisfy two key requirements: (1) efficiently locate the optimal design within a limited number of iterations, and (2) explore feasible solutions near constraint boundaries. The SCBO framework [14] fulfills both objectives by focusing on critical areas through transformations of the objective and constraints. We thus adopt SCBO as the optimization engine for ThermoDSE. Algorithm 2 outlines the SCBO workflow. Gaussian Process (GP) surrogate models are employed to fit the objective (EDYP and the constraints) based on evaluated design points 

{(xi, f i)|i = 1 , . . . , n } and predict the future design points 

{(x∗ 

> i

, f ∗i)|i = 1 , . . . , m }. GP models offer a non-parametric regression capability and perform well with sparse samples. The GP assumes a multivariate Gaussian distribution as the prior distribution on the objective function f (x) ∼ GP (μ, Σ) 

with mean μ = m(x) and covariance matrix Σ calculated via the kernel function K. Note that we employ a scaled Mat´ ern kernel for both objectives and constraints to balance smoothness and adaptability. Given evaluated design points X

and the design points we would like to test next X∗, we form the joint distribution as shown in Equation 25. 

h ff ∗

i

∼ N 

 m(X)

m(X∗),

 K(X, X), K (X, X∗)

K(X∗, X), K (X∗, X∗)

 

. (25) Then we can obtain the posterior distribution of f ∗ condi-tioning on known information, as shown in Equation 26. The posterior distribution provides us with insight into the poten-tial of future samples, helping us to make more reasonable decisions. 

f ∗|X∗, X, f ∼ N (μf ∗ , Σf ∗ ), where 

μf ∗ = m(X∗) + K(X∗, X)K(X, X)−1(f − m(X)) ,

Σf ∗ = K(X∗, X∗) − K(X∗, X)K(X, X)K(X, X∗).

(26) Conventional BO methods rely on acquisition functions such as Expected Improvement or Upper Confidence Bound JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9

to evaluate the potential of future samples over the posterior distributions. To be more detailed, they randomly sample several starting points and perform line search to find the sample that maximizes the acquisition function. In vast high-dimensional spaces, the line search is as difficult as looking for a needle in a haystack, resulting in low efficiency. To improve the efficiency of high-dimensional optimization, SCBO defines the trust regions and performs separate local optimization runs simultaneously to avoid getting lost in the overly large design space. The trust regions are hyper-rectangles centered at the current best design. In each iteration, the trust-region length l is adjusted adaptively according to Equation 27 based on consecutive successes or failures, where 

lmax and lmin denote predefined bounds. 

l =

(

min(2 l, l max ), if csuccess > th 

max( l/ 2, l min ), if cf ail > th (27) A success is registered when the objective improves be-yond a threshold while satisfying constraints; otherwise, a failure is recorded. When the success/fail counter reaches the user-defined threshold ( th ), the trust-region length l will be adjusted. The current best feasible design then becomes the new center xc for local exploration. The candidate sampling space is defined in Equation 28, where ϵ adds a stochastic per-turbation to encourage exploration and prevent local optimal trapping. 

Xtr (xc, l ) = x ∈ Ω | ∥ x − xc∥ ≤ l + ϵ . (28) SCBO uses constrained maximum posterior sampling (CMPS) to generate the next candidate batch from the dy-namic sampling region. For each sampled realization of objective function, peak-temperature constraint, and area constraint( ˆf (xi), ˆc1(xi), ˆc2(xi)), if feasible points exist within the trust region (i.e., ˆF = {xi| ˆc1(xi) < C 1, ˆc2(xi) < C 2}), SCBO selects x∗ = arg min x∈ ˆF ˆf (x). Otherwise, it selects the configuration with the minimum total constraint violation. V. E XPERIMENT 

A. Experiment Setup 

We conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate the proposed framework on an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6246R CPU @ 3.40GHz with 128GB of memory. For hardware configurations, the energy and area of the D2D interconnect are set to 1.17 pJ/bit and 81 K μm 2 per 25Gb/s bandwidth, respectively, as reported in [35]. Following previous work [9], we adopt a 4-channel DRAM as the off-chip memory, provid-ing a total capacity of 4GB and a peak bandwidth of 128GB/s. The energy consumption of the NoC and DRAM is set to 

0.6 pJ/bit and 8 pJ/bit , respectively [6], [9]. We implement an INT-8 MAC module and an FP-16 MAC module in Verilog HDL as the fundamental processing elements of the matrix unit and vector unit, respectively. The synthesized energy and area data are obtained using Synopsys Design Compiler with the TSMC 28nm process. Similarly, buffer configurations are derived from the TSMC memory compiler.                                        

> TABLE III BENCHMARK FOR COMMON NN S IN AR/VR.
> ResNet-50 Goog-LeNet Mobile-Netv2 Yolo-v2 U-Net BERT
> Batch size 224421FM Vol. (MB) 15.6 3.5 6.5 5.0 27.6 52.3 Wei. Vol. (MB) 24.3 6.6 1.7 18.9 13.4 32.5 GOPS 3.6 1.5 0.24 2.6 20.8 15.8 Sparsity 0.22 0.38 0.37 0.01 0.45 0
> Note: The input image size for all networks except BERT is 224 ×224 ×3.BERT refers to the BERT-Small model.

To ensure a fair comparison with baselines, we assume a 14nm process node and scale the results from the 28nm process to 14nm using DeepScaleTool [42]. In the yield model, the parameters α and d are set to 10 and 0.08, respectively, following Chiplet-actuary [2]. In addition, we assume an operating frequency of 1.8GHz (the peak frequency used in Simba [3]), since early-stage thermal exploration should consider the worst-case thermal conditions. This work focuses on embedded devices, where cooling capacity is typically limited. Accordingly, the interposer area is constrained to 300 mm 2, and the maximum peak temperature is limited to 75 ◦C. For thermal simulation, we use the default HotSpot 6.0 ambient temperature of 45 ◦C, with a convection resistance of 0.4 K/W to represent restricted cooling condi-tions [43]. 

B. Simlation Validation C. Implementation Details 

Architecture/Model: We evaluate multiple architectures and corresponding DSE algorithms in our experiments. Four representative architectures are considered: 1) Simba-like: 

This design follows Simba [3] and is implemented within our framework. It consists of 6 × 6 chiplets connected through a NoC/NoP network, with fine-grained task orchestration enabling data reuse and sharing. 2) Arch-T: Derived from TESA [12], this design has no NoC/NoP interconnect between NPUs or chiplets, with each chiplet operating independently. We implement it by disabling NoC/NoP interconnects in our simulator. 3) Arch-G: Based on the analytical model used in Chiplet-Gym [10]. Although the NoP provides inter-chiplet connectivity, no data reuse or sharing is supported. This configuration is represented in our framework by disabling data buffering. 4) Arch-S: A chiplet-based DNN accelerator architecture supporting fine-grained task orchestration across multiple chiplets. 

DSE Algorithm: Three DSE algorithms are implemented: 1) SA is adopted from TESA [12] to search for feasible chiplet-based DNN accelerator designs under thermal and area constraints. 2) RL is implemented following Chiplet-Gym [10], using the Gymnasium framework [44]. Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) employs Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) for both the policy and value networks. The policy (actor) network has the architecture [10, 64, 64, 810], and the value (critic) network is [10, 64, 64, 1], both with tanh 

activation functions. Since the original RL algorithm does not consider design constraints, we refine the reward function to JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10                                                                                            

> TABLE IV OVERALL COMPARISON OF PEAK TEMPERATURE AND PERFORMANCE FOR DIFFERENT ARCHITECTURES AND OPTIMIZERS
> Architecture Description Temp.(°C) Energy(mJ) Delay(ms) Yield EDYP cost
> B1 i) 6×6NPU cores, 6×6chiplets, 1.7mm ICS, 100GB/s NoP bandwidth. ii) 512KB uniform buffer and 64 ×16 systolic array. 69.6 103.3 4.46 0.998 461.6 B2 i) 3×2NPU cores, 3×2chiplets, 0.5mm ICS. ii) 4096KB uniform buffer and 160 ×208 systolic array. 58.8 77 4.72 0.985 228.4 B3 i) 8×2NPU cores, 8×2chiplets, 0.5mm ICS. ii) 4096KB uniform buffer and 128 ×128 systolic array. 71.1 63.2 2.46 0.989 157.2 B4 i) 4×4NPU cores, 4×4chiplets, 1.1mm ICS, 96GB/s NoP bandwidth. ii) 1024KB uniform buffer and 160 ×160 systolic array. 63.8 (74.6) 107.6 (70.2) 4.07 (2.35) 0.991 441.9 (166.5)
> Ours i) 5×4NPU cores, 1×2chiplets, 2.3mm ICS, 240GB/s NoC bandwidth. ii) 1024KB uniform buffer and 208 ×112 systolic array. 74.8 59.8 2.01 0.911 132.2 Note: For Chiplet-Gym (B4), the values in parentheses are the results obtained with fine-grained modeling.

incorporate area and temperature penalties, ensuring feasible final designs. 3) TED+SCBO: Our DSE algorithm, imple-mented using BoTorch [45]. 

Benchmarks: Table III is the summary of our benchmark, including the batch size, data volume of feature map, data volume of weight, and sparsity. The sparsity refers to pre-vious work [23] and can significantly influent the computing energy cost. These evaluation targets AR/VR applications [20], covering a diverse set of networks: image segmentation (U-net, Yolov2), object recognition (ResNet50), object detection (MobileNetv2, GoogLeNet), and speech recognition (BERT). The total delay and energy are computed as the weighted sum of each network’s corresponding batch execution. 

D. Overall Comparison 

We comprehensively compare ThermoDSE with prior works, including Simba [3], TESA [12], and Chiplet-Gym [10]. The experiments include five configurations: Simba-like, TESA, TESA ∗, Chiplet-Gym, and ThermoDSE. 

Simba-like (B1) mirrors the structure of Simba with 6 × 6

chiplets. Each chiplet integrates a 64 × 16 systolic array as the matrix unit and a 512KB uniform buffer. TESA (B2) 

and TESA ∗ (B3) correspond to Arch-T with the SA algo-rithm. Due to the absence of NoC/NoP, Arch-T only supports network-level parallelism. Chiplet-Gym (B4) combines Arch-G with the RL-based DSE algorithm. Two practical scenarios are considered: TESA represents the edge scenario , while TESA ∗ denotes an ideal scenario .In the edge scenario, workloads are limited; hence, we fix the number of chiplets in TESA to six—matching the number of network types—to avoid over-provisioning, following [12]. During execution, each network is mapped to a dedicated chiplet, and the scheduler evenly distributes workloads across chiplets to prevent thermal hot spots. The overall delay is determined by the maximum latency among all networks. In contrast, TESA ∗ assumes ample workloads for full parallel execution, with the total delay estimated by dividing the sequential delay by the number of NPU cores. Table IV summarizes the optimal designs obtained from each optimizer under the constraints of 75 ◦C peak temperature and 300 mm 2 area. The design produced by our framework consists of 5 × 4 NPU cores partitioned into 2 chiplets connected via a 240GB/s inter-chiplet link. The ICS is set to 2.3mm for improved cooling. Each NPU core employs a 1024KB uniform buffer and a 208 × 112 systolic array as the matrix computation unit. Owing to the intelligent resource allocation from our DSE algorithm, the achieved theoretical peak throughput is 1.8–12 .5× higher than the compared baselines. 

1) Comparison with Simba-like (B1): ThermoDSE achieves reductions of 1.7×, 2.2×, and 3.4× in energy, delay, and EDYP cost, respectively. Because D2D interconnects are significantly more energy-consuming than NoC links, Ther-moDSE tends to reduce the number of chiplets while increas-ing per-chiplet compute density to lower delay, even at a minor yield cost. 

2) Comparison with TESA (B2) and TESA ∗(B3): Although Arch-T avoids data communication energy by design, Ther-moDSE still achieves 1.7× and 1.2× lower EDYP cost than B2 and B3, respectively. In Arch-T, the absence of NoC/NoP means data reuse is restricted by the capacity of the local uniform buffer. As a result, the DSE algorithm allocates larger buffers to increase reuse. However, larger SRAMs introduce more energy consumption during access [27]. Interestingly, the energy increase in TESA due to larger SRAM closely matches the communication energy in our ThermoDSE design. Even in the ideal scenario (B3), where 100% core utilization is achieved, its delay remains higher than that of ThermoDSE due to the higher computing and DRAM access latency. Moreover, it is impractical for each chiplet to have its own independent DRAM channel in a large chiplet system. 

3) Comparison with Chiplet-Gym (B4): Results indicate that the analytical model used in Chiplet-Gym is highly inaccurate for chiplet-based DNN accelerators. Fine-grained task orches-tration can substantially improve both energy and delay. The errors in temperature, energy, and delay reach 9.8°C, 53%, and 73%, respectively. Consequently, the resulting design deviates considerably from the true optimal solution. Furthermore, due to inaccurate early-stage performance estimation, peak temperature is underestimated, leading to insufficient cooling design and misjudged performance margins. Fig. 7 presents the normalized energy and delay results for each neural network. Chiplet-Gym (B4) exhibits the highest energy consumption, as inputs and outputs must be read and JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11      

> Fig. 7. Normalized energy and delay across different architectures and optimizers (normalized to the Simba-like baseline).
> Fig. 8. EDYP cost vs. peak temperature. Selected design points for chiplet-based DNN accelerators under 300 mm 2area and 75 °C thermal constraints.

written to DRAM. Although its NoP-related energy is lower due to fewer chiplets than Simba-like design, the overall DRAM cost dominates. In contrast, ThermoDSE reduces both energy and peak temperature by using only two chiplets and minimizing expensive D2D interconnections. The layer type of different NNs will mainly affect the performance of chiplet-based DNN accelerator. the workloads can be categorized into two groups: (1) Compute-intensive networks , such as ResNet50, GoogLeNet, and Yolov2, contain predominantly compute-heavy layers, creating strong opportu-nities for data reuse and sharing. Even though thermal-aware mapping introduces additional data movement, ThermoDSE still achieves lower delay and energy than B3. DRAM costs in B2 and B3 remain much higher than in ThermoDSE and Simba-like, as repeated weight transfers among independent chiplets incur significant DRAM energy overhead. (2) Data-intensive networks , such as MobileNetv2, U-Net, and BERT, contain layers dominated by data movement. For instance, depthwise convolutions in MobileNet offer limited data reuse, leading to slightly higher energy and delay in ThermoDSE compared with B3. Similarly, U-Net’s upsampling and BERT’s GEMM layers exhibit lower data reuse and higher data move-ment. Although the NoC/NoP interconnect provides larger buffers for intermediate reuse, the additional interconnect energy partially offsets DRAM savings. For BERT, the delay of ThermoDSE is roughly 10% higher than B3 with ideal scenario . This is primarily because smaller matrix multiplications lower the processing element utilization  

> Fig. 9. Convergence behaviors for different thresholds in SCBO.

within the matrix unit. Moreover, BERT’s multi-head attention mechanism introduces extensive data traffic: the Q, K, and V computations are distributed across different NPU cores, and subsequent QK, QKV, and concatenation operations require intensive inter-core data fusion. Consequently, the NoC/NoP incurs higher latency. Adaptive, data-aware task mapping may further mitigate this overhead. Nevertheless, since BERT represents only one among several AR/VR workloads, Ther-moDSE still achieves an overall 1.2× lower delay than B3. 

E. DSE Algorithm Evaluation 

To better understand the relationship between thermal char-acteristics and EDYP, we conduct a exhaustively scan of approximately 440K neighboring design points around the optimal configuration obtained from ThermoDSE to identify the global optimal point. Fig. 8 illustrates the selected design points of chiplet-based DNN accelerators from this search. The best feasible design corresponds to a 5 × 4 NPU core array partitioned into 1 × 2 chiplets, connected via 256GB/s inter-chiplet links with an ICS of 2.3 mm. Each core integrates a 208 × 112 matrix unit and a 1024KB uniform buffer. This design is nearly identical to the final configuration obtained by our DSE method, except that it adopts a higher interconnect bandwidth. The 256GB/s bandwidth slightly reduces both delay and overall EDYP cost compared with the final DSE-derived design. In addition, the curve in Fig. 8 exhibits a U-shaped trend. Initially, as hardware resources increase, the EDYP cost de-creases due to shorter delays. However, beyond a certain point, over-provisioning NPU cores leads to a substantial rise in data JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12                        

> TABLE V COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT DSE ALGORITHMS .
> Method Iterations to Converge EDYP Speedup
> RL (PPO) 25,000 199.4 1×
> SA 3,180 153.5 7.9×
> ThermoDSE 850 132.4 29 .4×
> (a) Area Breakdown (b) Thermal Map
> Fig. 10. Analysis of area and thermal characteristics for the optimal design under 300 mm 2area and 75 ◦C constraints.

communication energy, while delay improvement becomes negligible, resulting in higher EDYP cost. Meanwhile, the 

300 mm 2 interposer area provides sufficient thermal dissipa-tion capacity, ensuring that the best design does not violate the temperature constraint. Next, we evaluate the effect of the trust-region adjustment threshold ( th in Equation 27) on ThermoDSE’s convergence behavior. Fig. 9 shows the convergence results for three differ-ent threshold settings. When th = 4 , ThermoDSE converges quickly because a smaller threshold makes the adjustment more sensitive to failed exploration steps. It can achieve a feasible design within only 156 iterations; however, the resulting EDYP cost remains relatively high. When th = 16 ,ThermoDSE identifies an almost optimal design with only 725 iterations. As the threshold increases, convergence becomes slower, but the observation cost decreases since the trust region is updated more gradually, allowing more tolerance for infeasible samples during boundary exploration. For constraint-aware chiplet-based design, the globally op-timal design point typically lies extremely close to the tem-perature and area boundaries. Therefore, although a larger threshold requires more iterations to converge than smaller ones, it ultimately yields a better final design. Finally, we compare ThermoDSE with SA and a PPO-based RL algorithm. To ensure fair comparison, both methods adopt the same architecture and task orchestration as ThermoDSE. The threshold of SCBO in ThermoDSE is fixed at 16. For RL, due to its extremely slow convergence, we allow up to 25K iterations. The reported EDYP value corresponds to the best design observed during RL exploration. Each method is executed twice, and Table V lists the average convergence iterations and final EDYP results. ThermoDSE consistently finds a design point with considerably lower EDYP than both SA and RL. Moreover, ThermoDSE requires 3.7× and 29 .4×

fewer iterations than SA and RL, respectively, demonstrating that our algorithm is far more efficient and better suited for chiplet-based DNN accelerator design space exploration.              

> Fig. 11. EDYP cost vs. peak temperature for chiplet-based DNN accelerators under 200 mm 2area and 75 ◦C thermal constraints. The feasible design (green) represents [4, 4, 1, 2, 2.3, 144, 112, 1024KB, 240], achieving a delay of 2.27 ms , energy consumption of 60 mJ , and a yield of 0.943. The cost-minimum design (red) corresponds to [5, 4, 1, 1, 0, 128, 112, 1024KB, 208], with a delay of 2.05 ms , energy consumption of 59 .7mJ , and a yield of 0.87.

F. Analysis of Performance, Area, and Temperature 

Our DSE framework identifies an almost optimal design point for chiplet-based DNN accelerators targeting AR/VR workloads. Fig. 10(a) shows the area breakdown of the final design. As AI workloads are highly computation-intensive and data can be efficiently shared among NPU cores under fine-grained task modeling, the DSE algorithm allocates approxi-mately 49% of the total area to computation units, particularly to the matrix units. The on-chip buffer accounts for 14.2% less area than the computation units. Compared with B2 and B3, the chiplet-based DNN accel-erators with NoC/NoP allow more area to be dedicated to computation. Consequently, ThermoDSE achieves lower delay under compute-dominated conditions, which are typical in AI workloads. In addition, 17.6% of the chip area is reserved for cooling structures. Fig. 10(b) illustrates the thermal distribu-tion of the optimal design obtained by ThermoDSE. Dividing the entire interposer into two dies not only minimizes the energy cost of D2D interconnects but also mitigates central thermal clustering, effectively reducing peak temperature. We further explore the design space under a tighter area constraint of 200 mm 2. Fig. 11 presents the relationship of EDYP cost versus peak temperature. When the area budget becomes limited, the peak-temperature constraint noticeably restricts performance improvement due to the reduced thermal dissipation area available for cooling. Furthermore, the min-imum achievable EDYP cost under a 300 mm 2 area budget is significantly lower than that of the 200 mm 2 configuration. These results highlight that the chiplet-based DNN accelerator design involves a complex trade-off among performance, area, and temperature. VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this work, we presented ThermoDSE , a thermal-aware and comprehensive design space exploration framework for chiplet-based DNN accelerators. ThermoDSE integrates fine-grained task modeling with a uniform simulation and optimiza-JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 13 

tion framework that simultaneously considers chiplet granular-ity, NPU core granularity, task orchestration, and inter-chiplet communication under strict thermal and area constraints. Com-pared with prior studies, our framework delivers significantly more accurate performance and thermal estimations. Ther-moDSE achieves up to 3.5× EDYP cost than state-of-the-art Simba-like designs and other optimization frameworks, respectively. Furthermore, the proposed DSE algorithm based on TED and SCBO attains superior design quality with 3.7×

and 29 .4× faster convergence compared with traditional SA and RL methods. In summary, ThermoDSE provides a scalable and physically-aware foundation for next-generation chiplet-based DNN accelerators. 

A. Key Takeaways 

The main insights obtained from this study are summarized as follows:  

> •

Chiplet granularity matters. Prior works often treated a single NPU core as one chiplet to maximize yield. However, overly fine-grained partitioning increases inter-chip communication energy and exacerbates thermal hot spots due to poor cooling on the bottom-layer inter-poser. Early-stage exploration of chiplet granularity is therefore essential, especially for energy- and thermally-constrained edge scenarios.  

> •

Integrated modeling is crucial. Accurate co-simulation of data communication, computation, and fine-grained task orchestration is necessary. Ignoring these interactions can cause large deviations in performance and tempera-ture estimation, leading to insufficient cooling design and incorrect performance budgeting.  

> •

Constraint-aware exploration is key. The optimal de-sign for chiplet-based accelerators often lies near con-straint boundaries. Hence, efficient exploration methods such as our TED+SCBO algorithm are required. 

B. Future Work 

This study focuses on 2.5D chiplet integration. Although 3D stacking can offer higher integration density and improved performance, it also introduces much greater complexity in thermal management and design exploration. In future work, we plan to extend ThermoDSE to support 3D heterogeneous integration, enabling comprehensive co-optimization across performance, thermal, and reliability dimensions. REFERENCES [1] Cerebras, “The future of ai is here.” [Online]. Available: https: //www.cerebras.ai/chip/ [2] Y. Feng and K. Ma, “Chiplet actuary: A quantitative cost model and multi-chiplet architecture exploration,” in DAC , 2022, pp. 121–126. [3] Y. S. Shao, J. Clemons, R. Venkatesan, B. Zimmer, M. Fojtik, N. Jiang, B. Keller, A. Klinefelter, N. Pinckney, P. Raina et al. , “Simba: Scaling deep-learning inference with multi-chip-module-based architecture,” in 

ISCA , 2019, pp. 14–27. [4] M. Gao, X. Yang, J. Pu, M. Horowitz, and C. Kozyrakis, “Tangram: Optimized coarse-grained dataflow for scalable NN accelerators,” in 

ASPLOS , 2019, pp. 807–820. [5] J. Cai, Y. Wei, Z. Wu, S. Peng, and K. Ma, “Inter-layer scheduling space definition and exploration for tiled accelerators,” in ISCA , 2023, pp. 1–17. [6] S. Zheng, X. Zhang, L. Liu, S. Wei, and S. Yin, “Atomic dataflow based graph-level workload orchestration for scalable dnn accelerators,” in HPCA . IEEE, 2022, pp. 475–489. [7] C. Bai, X. Wei, Y. Zhuo, Y. Cai, H. Zheng, B. Yu, and Y. Xie, “Klotski v2: Improved DNN model orchestration framework for dataflow archi-tecture accelerators,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2024. [8] Z. Tan, H. Cai, R. Dong, and K. Ma, “NN-Baton: DNN workload orches-tration and chiplet granularity exploration for multichip accelerators,” in 

ISCA . IEEE, 2021, pp. 1013–1026. [9] J. Cai, Z. Wu, S. Peng, Y. Wei, Z. Tan, G. Shi, M. Gao, and K. Ma, “Gemini: Mapping and architecture co-exploration for large-scale DNN chiplet accelerators,” in HPCA . IEEE, 2024, pp. 156–171. [10] K. Mishty and M. Sadi, “Chiplet-Gym: Optimizing chiplet-based AI accelerator design with reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Computers , 2024. [11] R. Mathur, A. K. A. Kumar, L. John, and J. P. Kulkarni, “Thermal-aware design space exploration of 3d systolic ml accelerators,” IEEE Journal on Exploratory Solid-State Computational Devices and Circuits , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 70–78, 2021. [12] P. Shukla, D. Aguren, T. Burd, A. K. Coskun, and J. Kalamatianos, “Temperature-aware sizing of multi-chip module accelerators for multi-dnn workloads,” in DATE . IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–6. [13] H.-Y. Liu and L. P. Carloni, “On learning-based methods for design-space exploration with high-level synthesis,” in Proceedings of the 50th annual design automation conference , 2013, pp. 1–7. [14] D. Eriksson and M. Poloczek, “Scalable constrained bayesian optimiza-tion,” in International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics .PMLR, 2021, pp. 730–738. [15] Z. Lai, J. Ye, X. Wang, Z. Fu, A. K. Singh, Y. Jiang, K. Ren, M. Yang, S. Qiu, X. Li et al. , “On optimizing intra-and inter-chiplet interconnection networks in multi-chiplet systems for accelerating fhe encrypted neural network applications,” Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems , 2025. [16] C.-J. Wu, D. Brooks, K. Chen, D. Chen, S. Choudhury, M. Dukhan, K. Hazelwood, E. Isaac, Y. Jia, B. Jia et al. , “Machine learning at face-book: Understanding inference at the edge,” in 2019 IEEE international symposium on high performance computer architecture (HPCA) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 331–344. [17] Y. Tian, K. Pei, S. Jana, and B. Ray, “Deeptest: Automated testing of deep-neural-network-driven autonomous cars,” in Proceedings of the 40th international conference on software engineering , 2018, pp. 303– 314. [18] R. Lu, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, J. Tang, J. Ni, D. Wan, G. Zeng, and S. Huang, “Taco: Taming diffusion for in-the-wild video amodal completion,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2025, pp. 13 638–13 650. [19] Q. Kong, Y. Kawana, R. Saini, A. Kumar, J. Pan, T. Gu, Y. Ozao, B. Opra, Y. Sato, and N. Kobori, “Wts: A pedestrian-centric traffic video dataset for fine-grained spatial-temporal understanding,” in European Conference on Computer Vision , 2024, pp. 1–18. [20] H. Kwon, L. Lai, M. Pellauer, T. Krishna, Y.-H. Chen, and V. Chandra, “Heterogeneous dataflow accelerators for multi-DNN workloads,” in 

HPCA . IEEE, 2021, pp. 71–83. [21] Y. N. Wu, J. S. Emer, and V. Sze, “Accelergy: An architecture-level energy estimation methodology for accelerator designs,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (IC-CAD) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8. [22] J. Peng, T. Liang, J. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Xie, and W. Zhang, “Data-pattern-based predictive on-chip power meter in DNN accel-erator,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4753–4766, 2024. [23] B. R. Pao, I.-C. Chen, E.-H. Chang, and T. T. Yeh, “EDA: Energy-efficient inter-layer model compilation for edge dnn inference acceler-ation,” in 2025 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 563–576. [24] S. Rahim, P. P. Nair, and R. Devaraj, “A survey of machine learning-driven task scheduling approaches for multiprocessor systems,” Journal of Systems Architecture , p. 103628, 2025. [25] W. Lin, X. Luo, C. Li, J. Liang, G. Wu, and K. Li, “An energy-efficient tuning method for cloud servers combining dvfs and parameter optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 3643–3655, 2023. [26] E. Russo, M. Palesi, D. Patti, S. Monteleone, G. Ascia, and V. Catania, “Multiobjective end-to-end design space exploration of parameterized dnn accelerators,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1800–1812, 2022. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 14 

[27] N. Muralimanohar, R. Balasubramonian, and N. P. Jouppi, “CACTI 6.0: A tool to model large caches,” HP laboratories , vol. 27, p. 28, 2009. [28] R. Zhang, M. R. Stan, and K. Skadron, “Hotpsot 6.0: Validation, acceleration and extension,” University of Virginia, Tech. Rep , 2015. [29] H. T. Kung and C. E. Leiserson, “Systolic arrays (for vlsi),” in Sparse Matrix Proceedings 1978 , vol. 1. Society for industrial and applied mathematics Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1979, pp. 256–282. [30] B. Asgari, R. Hadidi, and H. Kim, “Meissa: Multiplying matrices efficiently in a scalable systolic architecture,” in 2020 IEEE 38th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 130–137. [31] R. Shivnaraine, M. van Ierssel, K. Farzan, D. Diclemente, G. Ng, N. Wang, J. Musayev, G. Dutta, M. Shibata, A. Moradi et al. , “A 26.5625-to-106.25 gb/s XSR serdes with 1.55 pj/b efficiency in 7nm CMOS,” in ISSCC , vol. 64. IEEE, 2021, pp. 181–183. [32] A. Shokrollahi, D. Carnelli, J. Fox, K. Hofstra, B. Holden, A. Hormati, P. Hunt, M. Johnston, J. Keay, S. Pesenti et al. , “A pin-efficient 20.83 gb/s/wire 0.94 pj/bit forwarded clock CNRZ-5-coded SerDes up to 12mm for MCM packages in 28nm CMOS,” in ISSCC . IEEE, 2016, pp. 182–183. [33] A. Singh, D. Carnelli, A. Falay, K. Hofstra, F. Licciardello, K. Salimi, H. Santos, A. Shokrollahi, R. Ulrich, C. Walter et al. , “26.3 a pin-and power-efficient low-latency 8-to-12gb/s/wire 8b8w-coded serdes link for high-loss channels in 40nm technology,” in ISSCC . IEEE, 2014, pp. 442–443. [34] J. W. Poulton, W. J. Dally, X. Chen, J. G. Eyles, T. H. Greer, S. G. Tell, J. M. Wilson, and C. T. Gray, “A 0.54 pj/b 20 gb/s ground-referenced single-ended short-reach serial link in 28 nm CMOS for advanced packaging applications,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits ,vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3206–3218, 2013. [35] J. W. Poulton, J. M. Wilson, W. J. Turner, B. Zimmer, X. Chen, S. S. Kudva, S. Song, S. G. Tell, N. Nedovic, W. Zhao et al. , “A 1.17-pj/b, 25-gb/s/pin ground-referenced single-ended serial link for off-and on-package communication using a process-and temperature-adaptive voltage regulator,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits , vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 43–54, 2018. [36] “UCIe 1.1 specifications,” https://www.uciexpress.org/specifications, ac-cessed: 2025-09-15. [37] H. Liao, J. Tu, J. Xia, and X. Zhou, “Davinci: A scalable architecture for neural network computing,” in 2019 IEEE Hot Chips 31 Symposium (HCS) . IEEE Computer Society, 2019, pp. 1–44. [38] D. Wu, C.-T. Lin, and J. Huang, “Active learning for regression using greedy sampling,” Information Sciences , vol. 474, pp. 90–105, 2019. [39] S. Pouget, L.-N. Pouchet, and J. Cong, “Automatic hardware pragma insertion in high-level synthesis: A non-linear programming approach,” 

ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems , vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 1–44, 2025. [40] H. Fan, Y. Wang, S. Li, T. Liang, and W. Zhang, “Explainable fuzzy neural network with multi-fidelity reinforcement learning for micro-architecture design space exploration,” in Proceedings of the 61st ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference , 2024, pp. 1–6. [41] H. Liu, C. Bai, P. Xu, L. Yin, X. Yu, H.-L. Zhen, M. Yuan, T.-Y. Ho, and B. Yu, “LLMShare: Optimizing LLM inference serving with hardware architecture exploration,” in 2025 62nd ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–7. [42] S. Sarangi and B. Baas, “DeepScaleTool: A tool for the accurate estimation of technology scaling in the deep-submicron era,” in 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) , 2021, pp. 1–5. [43] K. Skadron, M. R. Stan, W. Huang, S. Velusamy, K. Sankaranarayanan, and D. Tarjan, “Temperature-aware microarchitecture,” ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 2–13, 2003. [44] M. Towers, A. Kwiatkowski, J. Terry, J. U. Balis, G. De Cola, T. Deleu, M. Goul˜ ao, A. Kallinteris, M. Krimmel, A. KG et al. , “Gymnasium: A standard interface for reinforcement learning environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17032 , 2024. [45] M. Balandat, B. Karrer, D. R. Jiang, S. Daulton, B. Letham, A. G. Wil-son, and E. Bakshy, “BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian Optimization,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 , 2020. 

Jian Peng received his B.S. degree from University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2019, and the MPhil degree from the Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Sci-ence and Technology, Hong Kong, in 2022. He is currently a PhD student in the same department and university. His current research interests include power modeling, power and thermal management, and energy-efficient DNN accelerator designs. 

Hanwei Fan is currently a PhD candidate in Recon-figurable Computing System Laboratory (RCSL) at the Department of Electronic & Computer Engineer-ing in HKUST under the supervision of Professor Wei ZHANG. Previously, He obtained the BEng Degree in Automation from Beijing Institute of Technology and the MPhil Degree in Microelec-tronics from HKUST. His research interests include computer architecture, hardware-software co-design, and machine learning for EDA. 

Jingbo Jiang received his B.S. degree from Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China, in 2016, and his M.S. degree from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, in 2020. He is currently working towards his Ph.D. degree at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China. His research interests are in circuit design for implementing deep learning algorithms. 

Lin Jiang is currently an associate professor at Northeastern University, China. He received his B.S. degree from Wuhan University and his M.S. degree from the University of Science and Technology of China. Dr. Jiang completed his Ph.D. at Clarkson University in New York, USA, and subsequently worked as a postdoctoral fellow at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. His research interests include thermal-aware physical design of processors, thermal management of 3D ICs, thermal modeling of multi-core CPUs and GPUs using data-driven approaches, reduced-order modeling, and finite element methods. He was a recipient of the Prof. Avram Bar-Cohen Best Paper Award from the 

21 st Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems. 

Wei Zhang (Fellow, IEEE) is a Professor at HKUST, where she established the RCSL. She received her PhD in Electrical Engineering from Princeton Uni-versity, receiving the Wu Prize for research excel-lence. Prior to joining HKUST in 2013, she was an Assistant Professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. She has authored over 150 peer-reviewed papers, winning Best Paper Awards at ISVLSI 2009, ICCAD 2017, and ICCAD 2022. Her research interests include reconfigurable systems, FPGA-based design, EDA, computer architecture, and embedded system security. Prof. Zhang serves as an Associate Editor for major journals including IEEE TCAD, IEEE TVLSI, and ACM TRETS. She has served as General Chair or Vice-Chair of ISVLSI 2018, FPT 2022 and ASAP 2024. She also serves on many organization committees and technical program committees, such as DAC, ICCAD, DATE, FPGA, etc.