Title: Quantized Probabilistic AI for Gear Fault Diagnosis in Motor Drives

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.05032v1

Published Time: Thu, 07 May 2026 01:23:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
The 2026 International Power Electronics Conference (IPEC-Nagasaki 2026 -ECCE Asia-) 

# Quantized Probabilistic AI for Gear Fault Diagnosis in Motor Drives 

Subham Sahoo 1*, Huai Wang 1, Frede Blaabjerg 1

1 Department of Energy, Aalborg University, Denmark *email: sssa@energy.aau.dk 

Abstract —Deploying large artificial intelligence (AI) models in power electronics often demands high computational resources. Driven by the quantization paradigm, this digest proposes a quantization-aware training (QAT) principle to substantially minimize the number of bits required and simultaneously max-imize the accuracy of computations in pre-trained AI models. Considering a pre-trained probabilistic Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) for gear fault diagnosis in motor drives as an example, we quantize its weights and activation functions from floating-point FP32 to low-precision INT8 values, which enhances the computational efficiency by a significant margin of 30-45% (for different model versions) without any compromise in the accu-racy and uncertainty estimates. This substantiates a sustainable mechanism of deploying most quantized light-weight AI models into low-cost edge processors for power electronic applications. 

Index Terms —Artificial intelligence, Fault diagnosis, Motor drives, Quantization. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Artificial intelligence (AI)-driven fault diagnosis in motor drives must run on constrained hardware (on-device, edge microcontrollers) while providing robust decisions under noisy sensors and unseen conditions [1], [2]. Bayesian neural net-works (BNNs) naturally provide calibrated predictive distribu-tions (epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty) [3], [4], which helps quantify diagnostic confidence and improves safety in the face of sensor noise or domain shift. Recent work has shown BNNs applied to gear-fault diagnosis in motor drives deliver inter-pretable uncertainty estimates and robustness to noisy/unseen data [5]. However, training of probabilistic weights can be quite time-consuming and demand a lot of resources. While model quantization is widely adopted to reduce computational complexity of AI models, it does not inherently guarantee the preservation of model accuracy or reliability. As shown in Fig. 1(a), direct quantization of a pre-trained BNN from FP32 to INT8 introduces rounding noise that often distorts the learned decision boundaries [6], [7], thereby com-promising classification accuracy and uncertainty calibration. To address this limitation, a Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) mechanism is proposed in this paper (see Fig. 1(b)), where quantization effects are simulated during training so that the model can adapt its parameters to the low-bit en-vironment [8]. Unlike conventional quantization that treats precision reduction as a post-processing step, QAT jointly optimizes both model weights and quantization thresholds, effectively learning to perceive quantization noise as part of the Model Quantization  

> FP32 to INT8
> Training
> Data
> Pre -Trained Bayesian Neural Network Model
> Gear Fault Diagnosis
> Model
> Quantization
> Quantization -Aware Training
> Model Quantization
> FP32 to INT8
> (a) (b)

Fig. 1. Quantization approaches for probabilistic BNNs: (a) direct model parameter quantization, (b) Quantization-aware training (QAT) [8] of the pre-trained model ensuring high classification accuracy. It should be noted that FP32 is a single-precision floating computer data format requiring 32 bits in computer memory, whereas INT8 requires 8 bits. 

training domain. As depicted, the proposed method preserves the angular relationships among fault classes and yields well-calibrated, high-confidence fault classification despite reduced bit precision. Building on this foundation, the key contribu-tions of this work are: 1) QAT-enabled probabilistic AI for motor drives : A novel integration of quantization-aware training into Bayesian neural networks, ensuring quantization robust-ness without loss of predictive uncertainty. 2) Empirical validation : Comprehensive benchmarking using the Gearbox Dynamic Simulator dataset, achieving 30–45% compute efficiency gain and ≈ 4×memory reduction with negligible accuracy degradation and dif-ferent noise levels. 3) Compute reliability trade-off framework : Analytical mapping of model accuracy, computational cost, and boundary shifts across quantization levels to guide edge hardware deployment. The proposed QAT-based probabilistic framework is particu-larly well-suited for deployment in resource-constrained sys-tems. Unlike FP32-based models that typically require GPU-level computational resources, INT8 quantized models can be efficiently executed on embedded processors such as DSPs, (C)2026IEEJ 

> arXiv:2605.05032v1 [eess.SY] 6 May 2026

The 2026 International Power Electronics Conference (IPEC-Nagasaki 2026 -ECCE Asia-)   

> Fig. 2. Experimental testbed with SpectraQuest Gearbox Dynamic Simulator and Danfoss VLT Drive FC-103 for collection of data in Table I. Stator
> Reactive
> current (A)
> Active
> current (A)
> DC
> Voltage
> (V)
> Drive
> Programmable
> Load (Dynamic
> Braking)

MMM

> Gearbox
> Faults
> Fig. 3. Layout of Gearbox Dynamic Simulator [14] for collection of different gear fault (re-configurable) data, obtained under different loading conditions.

ARM Cortex microcontrollers, and FPGA-based accelerators that support integer arithmetic. This transition from floating-point to integer computation enables faster inference due to simplified arithmetic pipelines and reduced memory band-width requirements. Furthermore, the reduction in model size, as shown in Fig. 6, allows the deployment of uncertainty-aware AI models within the limited memory budgets of edge devices. This makes the proposed approach highly relevant for real-time fault diagnosis in industrial motor drives, where low latency, reliability, and energy efficiency are critical. II. S YSTEM SPECIFICATIONS 

SpectraQuest’s Gearbox Dynamics Simulator (GDS), shown in Fig. 2 and 3, is used to simulate industrial gearboxes and emulate gear faults. More details on this setup can be found in [9]. Gear faults, that typically manifest as cracks on the gear or wear and tear of the gear teeth, were pre-configured for a dynamic brake as programmable load for data collection under different conditions. Hence, the gearbox in Fig. 2 and 3 can be easily swapped and reconfigured to the faults in Table I.                            

> TABLE I GEAR FAULT DATA PRELIMINARIES
> Fault Label Fault Intrinsic Data
> 1Missing tooth Speed 2Chipped tooth Motor torque 3Root crack DC link voltage 4Surface crack Active stator current 5Eccentricity Reactive stator current TABLE II BNN [5] P RELIMINARIES
> Parameters Quantity Training Data
> Convolutional layers 5 (2D networks) Fault 1 Max-pooling 2×1Fault 2 Hidden layers (Neurons) 3 hidden (128,64,32) Fault 3 Output 3-Optimizer Stoch. gradient descent -

Two types of sensors were used in this project, intrinsic 

(within the drive) and extrinsic (exterior to the drive). The setup in Fig. 2 was modified with a Danfoss VLT Drive FC-103 to provide the intrinsic measurements listed in Table I, each sampled at a frequency of 5 kHz. On the other hand, a pair of extrinsic orthogonally aligned analogue accelerometers ADXL1001 are mounted on the gearbox. A probabilistic Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) was employed to perform gear fault diagnosis using intrinsic measurements in Table I. This pre-trained BNN in [5] was designed to capture uncertainty in both model parameters and fault classification outcome, thereby enhancing diagnostic reliability under noisy and unseen conditions. Its specifications are listed in Table II. It should be noted that the QAT-based BNN will be finally tested with unseen data Fault 4 & 5 in Table I. III. C OMPARING MODEL QUANTIZATION AND LIGHT AI Lightweight AI methods, such as pruning or architectural compression [10], [11] minimize the parameter count P ′ < P 

or layer depth L′ < L , but they alter the original hypothesis space H of the original AI model, leading to a perturbed mapping f ′(x)̸ = f (x). In contrast, Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) retains the pre-trained model structure and embeds quantization during training, such that: 

ˆw = Q(w) = round 

 w

∆



∆, LQAT = Ldata 

 f ( ˆ w, x ), y ,

(1) where, ∆ denotes the quantization step size. The gradients are computed through a straight-through estimator (STE) [12] ensuring: 

∇wLQAT ≈ ∇ ˆwLdata , (2) which preserves the optimization trajectory of the full-precision network while learning robustness to quantization noise. Hence, QAT acts as a precision regularizer that con-strains weight dynamics within discrete manifolds without compromising the pretrained model’s success. This is helpful in reducing the compute memory requirements for pre-trained AI models tailormade for power electronic applications, in-stead of designing a new lightweight model without any theoretical performance guarantees. The impact of quantization can be systematically analyzed through a trade-off between classification accuracy, uncertainty calibration, and computational cost. Let A( b), U( b), and C( b)

denote the accuracy, uncertainty calibration error, and com-putational cost of the model at bit-width b, respectively. The (C)2026IEEJ The 2026 International Power Electronics Conference (IPEC-Nagasaki 2026 -ECCE Asia-) Pre -Trained Bayesian 

Neural Network Weights 

Quantiz er 

Activation 

Function 

Quantization 

> Forward
> Pass
> Backward
> Pass
> Training Data: Fault 1,2,3

STE    

> Fig. 4. Quantization-aware-training framework [8]–Conversion of weights and activation functions in pre-trained BNN in Table II for quantized inferences. In the backward pass for INT8 weights, gradients are passed through as if the rounding operation were an identity function using the Straight-Through Estimator (STE) function [12].

design objective for edge deployment can then be formulated as: 

b∗ = arg min  

> b

C( b) subject to A( b) ≥ Amin , U( b) ≤ Umax 

(3) where, Amin and Umax represent application-specific thresh-olds for acceptable accuracy and uncertainty. This formulation highlights that quantization is not merely a compression tool, but a design parameter that governs the balance between performance and efficiency. IV. Q UANTIZATION -A WARE TRAINING OF PROBABILISTIC 

AI FOR MOTOR DRIVES 

Conventional post-training quantization from FP32 to INT8 rarely preserves accuracy or diagnostic confidence, as the network was never optimized for quantization noise. To over-come this, Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) [8] embeds the quantization process directly within training so that the model learns to operate natively in low precision. 

A. Quantization-aware training 

As illustrated in Fig. 3, the workflow begins with a pre-trained Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) trained on gearbox fault data (Fault 1, 2 & 3), both the FP32 weights and 

activations are quantized to INT8 through learned quantizers, producing low-bit counterparts that approximate the original full-precision mapping, 

∥fFP32 (x) − fINT8 (x)∥2 ≤ ϵ (4) where, ϵ denotes the learned quantization tolerance. In the 

backward pass , gradients flow through the non-differentiable rounding operation using the Straight-Through Estimator (STE) [12]: ∂∂x round (x) ≈ 1, (5) allowing standard gradient-based optimization to continue while incorporating quantization effects. Through this dual-stage process, the BNN gradually adapts its parameters to compensate for quantization noise, yielding INT8 models that retain predictive accuracy and calibrated uncertainty. Hence, QAT outlined in Algorithm I enables a noise-aware learning mechanism , ideally suited for reliable, low-power gear-fault diagnosis in motor drives. In a Bayesian Neural Network (BNN), each model param-eter is represented as a probability distribution rather than a deterministic scalar. Given training data D = {xi, y i}, the posterior over weights is expressed as: 

p(w|D ) = p(D| w) p(w)

p(D) , (6) where, p(D| w) denotes the likelihood , and p(w) represents the prior distribution of the weights [5]. For inference, the predictive distribution over the target y∗ for an unseen input 

x∗ is computed as: 

p(y∗|x∗, D) = 

Z

p(y∗|x∗, w) p(w|D ) dw. (7) 

B. Quantization of Bayesian weights 

During quantization-aware training (QAT) in Fig. 4, each stochastic weight sample w drawn from the learned posterior 

p(w|D ) is quantized to a finite set of discrete levels. Let the quantizer Q(·) map a continuous value to the nearest quantized representation: 

Q(w) = clip 



round 

 wS



, −2b−1, 2b−1 − 1



S (8) where, S = β−α 

> 2b−1

is the quantization scale factor, b is the bit width, and [α, β ] is the clipping range for the corresponding tensor. In this way, the quantized posterior can be approxi-mated as: 

˜p(wq |D ) ≈ Y

> i

δ(w(i) 

> q

− Q (w(i))) (9) where, δ(·) denotes the Dirac delta function representing quantization to discrete levels. (C)2026IEEJ The 2026 International Power Electronics Conference (IPEC-Nagasaki 2026 -ECCE Asia-) 

Algorithm 1 QAT workflow for BNNs  

> 1:

Input: Pre-trained BNN L(θ), training data D = {xi, y i} 

> 2:

Initialize quantization parameters: bit width b, clipping range [α, β ] 

> 3:

for each training iteration do  

> 4:

Quantize weights: wq = Quantize (w, b, [α, β ])  

> 5:

Quantize activations: hq = Quantize (h, b, [α, β ])  

> 6:

Perform forward pass with (wq , h q ) to compute loss 

L 

> 7:

Compute gradients using STE : ∂∂x round (x) ≈ 1 

> 8:

Update weights: θ ← θ − η∇θ L 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

Output: Quantization-aware trained model LQAT (θq )

C. Quantization of activations 

Similarly, activations hi = fi(hi−1; wi) are quantized after each layer to simulate integer arithmetic during forward propagation: 

hi,q = Q(hi) = clip 



round 

 hi

Sh



, −2b−1, 2b−1 − 1



Sh

(10) where, Sh is the scale factor for the activations. This ensures that both the weights and intermediate feature maps are represented in low precision during training. In the context of gear fault diagnosis, this QAT-enabled BNN effectively learns to internalize quantization noise as part of its uncertainty model. 

D. Interpretation of quantization in probabilistic models 

Quantization in probabilistic neural networks can be inter-preted as a structured form of noise injection that interacts naturally with the uncertainty modeling capability of Bayesian frameworks. In conventional deterministic networks, quantization intro-duces rounding errors that distort decision boundaries. How-ever, in Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs), where weights are represented as probability distributions, such perturbations can be absorbed within the learned posterior. From this perspec-tive, quantization acts as a constraint that projects continuous weight distributions onto discrete manifolds, effectively reg-ularizing the model. This allows the network to internalize quantization noise as part of its uncertainty representation, rather than treating it as an external disturbance. As a result, the predictive distributions remain calibrated even under re-duced precision, explaining the observed preservation of both classification accuracy and uncertainty estimates in the QAT-based framework. 

E. Synergy of quantization to physical characteristics of power electronic systems 

The discrete nature of quantization aligns well with the operational characteristics of power electronic systems. In practical motor drives, signals are inherently digitized through analog-to-digital converters and influenced by switching dy-namics, resulting in discretized and noisy measurements. From (a)  

> (b)
> Fig. 5. Performance evaluation–(a) Comparative evaluation of pre-trained BNN with and without QAT, (b) Performance of QAT-based BNN under -20 dB noise–rise in aleatoric uncertainty (accounting for noise) affects the confidence level.
> Fig. 6. Compute cost variance of the QAT-based BNN with respect to different quantization levels.

this perspective, quantization-aware training can be interpreted as embedding these physical constraints directly into the learning process. By incorporating quantization effects dur-ing training, the model becomes inherently robust to signal discretization and measurement noise, which are intrinsic to power electronic environments. This further strengthens the physical consistency of the proposed framework, bridging the gap between digital control systems and probabilistic AI modeling. (C)2026IEEJ The 2026 International Power Electronics Conference (IPEC-Nagasaki 2026 -ECCE Asia-)   

> Fig. 7. Test accuracy and memory footprint of the QAT-based BNN model at discrete quantization levels–measured using [13].
> Fig. 8. Performance under extreme low-bit quantization–classification accu-racy shows a gradual degradation at INT4 precision, which translates into application-dependent decision thresholds for design engineers.

V. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

To investigate the performance, the model training and inference of QAT-based BNN is carried out on a NVIDIA 

RTX 4050 GPU hardware with the memory as well as compute resources estimated in Hugging Face [13] environment. The classification behavior of QAT-based BNN under seen data conditions is shown in Fig. 4(a). The box plots compare the predictive probability distributions obtained with and with-out QAT for the three representative gear faults. Without QAT, the model exhibits wider probability spreads and lower mean confidence across all fault classes, indicating a high degree of epistemic uncertainty even on known operating conditions. This suggests that direct post-training quantization distorts the BNN’s learned decision boundaries, resulting in less calibrated fault predictions. In contrast, the QAT-based BNN maintains a sharper and more compact probability distribution for each fault class. The confidence levels are significantly higher, and the variance within class predictions is markedly reduced. This reflects that the QAT process successfully adapts the model param-eters to the quantization-induced perturbations during train-ing, thereby aligning the quantized INT8 inference behavior with the original FP32 network. Consequently, the QAT-based BNN produces fault classifications that are both accurate and 

confidence-calibrated , ensuring that probabilistic decisions re-main consistent with those of the full-precision model. Fig. 4(b) further investigates model robustness by intro-ducing a −20 dB Gaussian noise to the input data. The empirical coverage plot separates the total uncertainty into its 

aleatoric (data-dependent) and epistemic (model-dependent) components. Even under heavy noise, the QAT-based BNN preserves high total calibration fidelity. The decomposition further shows that aleatoric uncertainty dominates in high-confidence regions—consistent with the physical expecta-tion that sensor noise primarily affects measurement reliabil-ity—while epistemic uncertainty increases in low-confidence regions, reflecting the model’s uncertainty about unseen con-ditions. These observations confirm that the proposed QAT framework not only compresses the Bayesian model but also enhances its ability to maintain reliable uncertainty estimates in noisy motor-drive environments. Hence, quantization in this form serves as both a computational optimization and an implicit regularization mechanism, promoting robust and interpretable fault diagnosis in motor drives. The computational cost variance across different quanti-zation levels is illustrated in Fig. 5. The 3D surface map relates the model size (in MB), quantization level (bit width), and the corresponding compute resources measured in tera-operations per second (TOPS). As the bit-width decreases from FP32 to INT8 and below, both the model size and required computational resources exhibit a near-monotonic reduction. This trend highlights that quantization enables a predictable scaling of computational complexity, primarily due to the transition from floating-point to integer arithmetic, which significantly reduces memory bandwidth and arithmetic overhead. Notably, the reduction in compute cost follows an approximately smooth and near-linear trend with decreasing bit-width, indicating that quantization can be treated as a controllable design parameter rather than an ad-hoc com-pression step. Hence, designers can systematically select an appropriate bit-width to balance computational efficiency and model performance, without encountering abrupt degradation in accuracy or reliability. As the quantization level decreases toward lower bit widths (e.g., 8-bit and below), the computational cost exhibits a monotonic reduction. This is evident from the downward slope of the surface in Fig. 6, which reflects the transition from high-precision arithmetic to more compact integer operations. At INT8 precision, the compute resource requirement drops by nearly 30–45%, accompanied by a corresponding reduction in memory footprint of approximately four times, as validated through profiling on the NVIDIA RTX 4050 GPU. Further in Fig. 7, minimal accuracy loss is observed as quantization level increases. Nevertheless, even at low bit-widths (4-8 bits), the test accuracy remains above 98.5%, which indicates that QAT preserves model performance of pre-trained BNN. Moving from 32-bit to 8-bit reduces estimated model size from 10 MB to <2.5 MB, which highlights around 4 times reduction (C)2026IEEJ The 2026 International Power Electronics Conference (IPEC-Nagasaki 2026 -ECCE Asia-) in memory cost, making them viable for edge deployment. The trends observed in Fig. 6-7 align with the trade-off formulation in (3), where INT8 represents a practical operating point balancing computational cost and accuracy. The results in Fig. 8 under low-bit quantization (INT4) indicate that while classification accuracy remains consistently high for INT8 and above, a noticeable degradation emerges at extreme low precision. This behavior suggests that the decision boundaries of the model become increasingly compressed and susceptible to misclassification as the representational reso-lution decreases. From a practical standpoint, this motivates the introduction of adaptive decision thresholds to maintain reliable operation under constrained precision. Specifically, instead of relying on fixed maximum-probability classification, a minimum confidence threshold can be imposed, below which decisions are either rejected or flagged for further evaluation. This allows the system to trade-off between classification coverage and reliability, where lower bit-widths require higher rejection rates to maintain acceptable diagnostic accuracy. Despite its advantages, the proposed QAT-based probabilis-tic framework has certain limitations:  

> •

aggressive quantization to very low bit-widths (e.g., be-low 4 bits) may lead to degradation in both accuracy and uncertainty calibration due to excessive discretization of weight distributions.  

> •

the effectiveness of quantization-aware training depends on the availability of representative training data, as the model must learn to adapt to quantization noise during training. These aspects highlight potential directions for future research toward improving robustness under extreme quantization con-straints. VI. C ONCLUSION 

This paper demonstrates that quantization-aware training (QAT) enables Bayesian neural networks to operate efficiently in low-precision regimes while preserving both predictive accuracy and uncertainty calibration. Experimental results show that INT8 quantization achieves a 30–45% reduction in computational cost and approximately 4× reduction in memory footprint (from 10 MB to <2.5 MB), without compromising diagnostic performance. Notably, the classification accuracy remains above 98.5% even at low bit-widths (4–8 bits), con-firming that the proposed approach retains the discriminative capability of the original FP32 model. Furthermore, under severe noise conditions (-20 dB), the QAT-based model maintains well-calibrated predictive uncer-tainty, with a clear separation between aleatoric and epistemic components. Compared to direct post-training quantization, the proposed method significantly reduces the spread of predictive distributions for seen faults, indicating improved confidence calibration and robustness. These results collec-tively demonstrate that QAT not only compresses the Bayesian model but also acts as an implicit regularization mechanism, enabling reliable and interpretable fault diagnosis under con-strained precision. Hence, the proposed framework establishes a practical path-way for deploying uncertainty-aware AI models on resource-limited edge hardware in power electronic systems, without compromising its performance. REFERENCES [1] Y. Liao and Y. Zhang, ”Rethinking Model-Based Fault Detection: Uncertainties, Risks, and Optimization Based on a Multilevel Converter Case Study,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 14229-14239, Nov. 2024. [2] F. Rojas, C. Jerez, C. M. Hack, O. Kalmbach, J. Pereda, and J. Lillo, “Faults in modular multilevel cascade converters—Part II: Fault tolerance, fault detection & diagnosis and system reconfiguration,” IEEE Open J. Ind. Electron. , vol. 3, pp. 594–614, Oct. 2022. [3] Z. Lai, W. Peng, G. Feng, M. Pan, “Bayesian Deep Learning for Fault Diagnosis of Induction Motors with Reduced Data Reliance and Improved Interpretability,” IEEE Trans. Energy Conv. , 2025. [4] G. Li, J. Wu, C. Deng, Z. Chen, and X. Shao, ”Convolutional neural network-based Bayesian Gaussian mixture for intelligent fault diagnosis of rotating machinery,” IEEE Trans. Instr. and Meas. , vol. 70, pp. 1-10, 2021. [5] S. Sahoo, H. Wang, and F. Blaabjerg, “Uncertainty-aware artificial intelligence for gear fault diagnosis in motor drives,” 2025 IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition (APEC) , pp. 912–918, 2025. [6] A. Gholami, S. Kim, Z. Dong, Z. Yao, M. W. Mahoney, and K. Keutzer, “A survey of quantization methods for efficient neural network inference,” in Low-power computer vision,” Chapman and Hall/CRC ,pp. 291–326, 2022. [7] R. Krishnamoorthi, “Quantizing deep convolutional networks for effi-cient inference: A whitepaper,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08342 , 2018. [8] M. Nagel, M. Fournarakis, R. A. Amjad, Y. Bondarenko, M. Van Baalen, and T. Blankevoort, “A white paper on neural network quantization,”                       

> arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08295 , 2021. [9] A. Biswas, “Intelligent motor fault detection ”, Master’s thesis , Univer-sity of South Denmark, 2023. [10] C. H. Wang, K. Y. Huang, Y. Yao, J. C. Chen, H. H. Shuai, & W. H. Cheng, “Lightweight deep learning: An overview,” IEEE Consumer Electron. Mag. , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 51-64, 2022. [11] P. V. Dantas, W. S. da Silva Jr, L. C. Cordeiro, & C. B. Carvalho, “A comprehensive review of model compression techniques in machine learning,” Appl. Intellig. , vol. 54, no. 22, pp. 11804-11844, 2024. [12] S. Jung, C. Son, S. Lee, J. Son, J.-J. Han, Y. Kwak, S. J. Hwang, and C. Choi, “Learning to quantize deep networks by optimizing quantization intervals with task loss,” Proc. of the IEEE/CVF conf. on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 4350–4359, 2019. [13] [Online] “Hugging face model memory estimator,” https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/usage guides/model size estimator, accessed: 2025-11-03. [14] [Online] SpectraQuest gearbox dynamics simulator,” https://spectraquest.com/gearbox-dynamics-simulator/, accessed: 2025-11-03.

(C)2026IEEJ