Title: Tensor Memory Engine: On-the-fly Data Reorganization for Ideal Locality

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13319v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 00:15:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Tensor Memory Engine: On-the-fly Data Reorganization for Ideal Locality 

# Denis Hoornaert 

# Technical University of Munich denis.hoornaert@tum.de 

# Cole Strickler 

# University of Kansas colestrickler@ku.edu 

# Manos Athanassoulis 

# Boston University mathan@bu.edu 

# Marco Caccamo 

# Technical University of Munich mcaccamo@tum.de 

# Heechul Yun 

# University of Kansas heechul.yun@ku.edu 

# Renato Mancuso 

# Boston University rmancuso@bu.edu 

# Abstract 

The shift to data-intensive processing from the cloud to the edge has introduced new challenges and expectations for the next generation of intelligent computing systems. As the compute-memory gap continues to grow, meeting these ex-pectations implies that substantially more emphasis must be placed on careful memory optimization. Indeed, it is crucial for application-level access patterns to exhibit high spatiotem-poral locality in caches using ideal memory layouts. However, only a minority of data-intensive applications are naturally characterized by ideal locality. Conversely, most applications exhibit either (i) poor locality when naively implemented, thus requiring costly redesigns and tuning, or (ii) an inflated memory footprint to offer proper locality. To address the afore-mentioned challenges, we propose to decouple computation from data layout (re)organization. We do so by introducing a Tensor Memory Engine (TME) capable of exporting dynamic alternative data layouts to CPU applications. Our approach transparently inserts TME on the CPUs’ data path when beneficial. TME performs on-the-fly data reorga-nization without data duplication to maximize cache locality by (i) accessing the memory on behalf of the CPUs and (ii) dynamically composing and serving re-organized cachelines to the upstream cache hierarchy. Unlike in- and near-memory computing approaches, it sets itself apart by clearly decou-pling computation from memory (re)organization: computa-tion is still performed on CPUs while data layout selection is delegated to the Tensor Memory Engine. TME follows a hardware/software co-design approach that can be imple-mented on commercially available SoC/FPGA platforms. We propose and evaluate a full-stack TME implementation on real hardware. 

# 1 Introduction 

Data Locality Remains a Fundamental Challenge. The shift of data-intensive processing from the cloud to the edge has introduced new challenges and raised expectations for the next generation of intelligent computing systems. This trend has prompted many innovations across the hardware–software architecture continuum. In particular, significant effort has been devoted to devising sophisticated multi-level caching architectures to bridge the widening performance gap [31, 41] between the Processing Elements (PEs such as CPUs, GPUs, and TPUs) and DRAM-based main memory. The effectiveness of caches, however, is dramatically af-fected by data access patterns and their degree of spatiotem-poral locality. Overall, only a minority of data-intensive ap-plications exhibit ideal locality. Instead, most applications that operate over high-dimensional data objects exhibit poor locality when naïvely implemented and must undergo costly redesigns and tuning to benefit from caching effects [29]. 

Data Layout of High-Dimensional Objects. Many data-intensive applications naturally operate on high-dimensional objects, such as tables with many attributes, feature vec-tors, images, time series, or intermediate results in analytic pipelines [39]. Representing these structures as tensors (i.e., multi-dimensional arrays) provides a uniform abstraction for capturing both their logical organization (dimensions, indices) and their physical realization (layouts, strides, and tilings in memory) [20]. Achieving better cache locality when working with tensors often requires a tensor layout transformation: changing the order of dimensions, reshaping, blocking, or fus-ing/splitting axes corresponds directly to standard tensor op-erations such as transpose, reshape, and reindexing. The core challenge is that performing these transformations requires moving data through the memory hierarchy, often polluting it with unnecessary parts of the tensor. Moreover, these in-memory re-organizations of large tensors may not be possible on memory-limited devices (e.g., edge systems). 

Relationship with Existing In/Near Memory Processing. 

Poor locality in several data-intensive applications has moti-vated research and investment in near- and in-memory com-puting [16, 18]. Such approaches suggest moving part of the computation to where the data rest (i.e., memory) to reduce data movement and alleviate the growing cost of traversing the 1

> arXiv:2604.13319v1 [cs.AR] 14 Apr 2026

memory hierarchy. However, such approaches often require specialized compute architectures and memory technologies, such as vendor-specific DRAM modifications—for example, Ambit provides in-DRAM bitwise operations with an esti-mated 1% DRAM chip area overhead [36]. While these sub-stantial architectural redesigns might be justified for specific popular applications, their highly customized designs restrict portability and adoption in commodity systems. As such, in this work, we study the possibility of mitigating the memory bottleneck problem while relying on traditional processor, cache, and main memory technologies. We do so by introduc-ing additional hardware to offload memory re-organization and export ideal locality without costly memory re-layouts and cache-aware algorithmic optimizations. 

System-on-Chip to the Rescue. In this paper, we posit that the democratization of SoC/FPGA offers a new avenue for near-/in-memory computing. We build on the idea advocated in [32,35] of changing the role that the FPGA plays in the sys-tem: from hosting accelerators and peripherals to becoming part of the PE’s data path. More precisely, we propose the Ten-sor Memory Engine (TME); a cache-coherent FPGA-located module that electively handles memory requests from the PEs’ data path and, when doing so, responds with a re-organized representation of the memory that best fits the software’s data locality. TME achieves this by accessing the system’s mem-ory on behalf of the SoC’s PEs; only expertly accessing the few memory locations needed to compose the requested re-organized cache line. This module enables the end-user to define any re-organized view of dense data structures such as tensors without increasing the software memory footprint or working set size (WSS)—i.e., without requiring the duplica-tion of dense data structures in memory. 

Software-Hardware Co-design for Ideal Locality. The pro-posed TME represents an answer to the question: Can we leverage application-level knowledge of data access patterns in the underlying memory hierarchy to export effortless and ideal data locality? In other words, we focus on a key limita-tion of modern computing systems, i.e., that the representation of data in micro-architectural caches mirrors the organiza-tion of data in main memory. Our work proposes an easy-to-program, easy-to-implement strategy for on-the-fly data transformation , which is defined as the ability to re-organize, filter, compress, and reshape the content of data blocks as they are transferred from (i) their representation in main memory and (ii) to PE-facing caches. 

Contributions. Our work offers the following contributions. • We describe and outline the architecture of TME; a hardware/software co-design approach that aims to pro-vide applications workloads with (i) ideal spatiotemporal cache locality and (ii) limited increase of the WSS. • We provide an open-source 1 prototype of TME that can 

> 1Project URL omitted for review.

be implemented on widely available commercial SoC/F-PGA platforms; in our case the AMD-Xilinx UltraScale+ Kria KR260 development board. • We showcase, evaluate, and discuss the benefits of TME using our prototype on various vision- and AI-relevant operations on tensors. Our results indicate that reduced execution times and smaller memory footprints can be simultaneously achieved. 

# 2 Background 

In this section, we provide the necessary background on the hardware-software co-design concepts we build upon. 

# 2.1 Tensors 

A tensor is a mathematical object that generalizes the concept of scalars, vectors, and matrices to higher dimensions. The number of dimensions of a tensor is referred to as the order .Thus, an order-1 tensor is an array, while an order-2 tensor is a matrix. In vision as well as AI applications, tensors are used as the fundamental data structure to represent complex data objects like color images (3-order tensors) or video (4-order tensors). A full tensor specification involves its shape ,which describes the specific dimensions of the tensor—e.g.,, a 1024 × 1024 × 3 RGB image with a resolution of 1024 pixels by 1024 pixels. Additionally, tensors are homogeneous objects, and the data type refers to the kind of value each element of the tensor holds—e.g.,, a floating point or integer. While modern AI frameworks such as TensorFlow [2] and PyTorch [30] have popularized the association of tensors with neural networks, tensor processing is also at the core of traditional vision and signal processing pipelines [39]. 

# 2.2 Processing In/Near Memory 

Modern computing systems adhere to a compute-centric paradigm, in which data is transported to processing units for execution. This design choice is increasingly misaligned with contemporary workloads and technology trends: (1) applica-tions are becoming more data-intensive and bandwidth-bound, and (2) data movement now dominates both energy consump-tion and performance overhead in modern platforms [26]. This is exacerbated by the fact that DRAM scaling has failed to keep pace with the growth of computational throughput To address these trends, there has been a proliferation of research into Processing in Memory (PIM) and Processing Near Memory (PNM) architectures that locate compute capa-bilities closer to data. By executing certain operations either within the memory arrays themselves (PIM) [11, 21] or in close proximity (PNM) [37], these approaches aim to alle-viate bandwidth pressure on traditional memory hierarchies and improve performance for data-intensive workloads. 22.3 PS-PL Platforms. 

Since the early 2010s, the ever more heterogeneous computing landscape has seen the advent and nascent adoption of the so-called PS-PL platform. This type of platform tightly combines a typical SoC architecture (referred to as Processing System or PS) with a dynamically reprogrammable logic fabric (re-ferred to as Programmable Logic or PL). In the vast majority of cases, the latter is implemented as a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA). Many PS-PL architectures have been de-signed by industry [14, 24, 42] and research-led [4, 7] projects. Each comes with its own specificity; however, the same key concepts prevail. In this paper, we assume a SoC architecture similar to Xilinx UltraScale+ [42]. The PS is composed of a multi-core computing cluster whose cores are connected via a Last-level Cache. In addition to ensuring inter-core coherence, the Last-level Cache (LLC) interfaces the core cluster with the memory subsystem. The LLC is connected to a DRAM controller via a coherent inter-connect that routes requests across the SoC and, if enabled, ensures coherence between the core cluster and the FPGA. Note that the memory subsystem is located on the PS side. The interfacing means between the PS and PL can be grouped into two categories: (i) Unidirectional high-performance interfaces. PS-PL platforms offer a set of unidirectional ports that allow communication (1) from PS to PL and (2) from PL to PS. Each PS-to-PL port is mapped to a unique SoC-wide phys-ical address range, allowing any PE-originated transaction to be explicitly routed to the PL side. Similarly, PL-to-PS ports allow the PL to access any memory target (e.g., on-chip memories, DRAM controller) located in the PS using their predefined addresses. Naturally, PS-PL platform are agnostic to the bus protocol used but, the most popular and available SoCs implements the AXI-Full protocol [5]. (ii) Two-way coherent interfaces. In some SoC models, the PL is not confined to host peripheral modules and non-coherent accelerators. It can be added to the SoC coher-ence domain by enabling the coherence port. This enables the PL to receive snoops from the CCI, effectively ex-porting information about the memory-related activity occurring in the PS to the PL. Previous research [32] exemplifies the level of detail that can be extracted and exploited this way. 

# 2.4 Programmable Logic in the Middle 

The Programmable Logic in the Middle (PLIM) approach [35] describes a new way to employ the reprogrammable fabric of PS-PL platforms. Instead of seeing the PL side as solely a host for accelerators and peripherals controllers, PLIM pro-poses to utilize the PL as part of the PS’s PEs’ data path. The key idea is that, by giving the PL observability of the PS’s memory activity, the PL-located PLIM module is able to analyze, manipulate, and monitor individual transactions. In [35], PS-originated memory transactions are routed to the PL by instrumenting the software to explicitly target the ad-dress ranges of the unidirectional high-performance interfaces. Once in the PL, the transactions are analyzed, manipulated, or monitored before being relayed to main memory via a simple address translation. Such approach was successfully used to 

(i) work around address-coloring side effects [35], (ii) high-light timing anomalies [12], and (ii) re-organizing database representation on-the-fly [33]. 

Coherence Backstabbing. PLIM was later extended to lever-age the existing two-way PS-PL coherence interface to insert itself on the back of the coherence protocol, an approach called coherence backstabbing [32]. Doing so elevates the position of the PL in the system and increases its privilege level and its level of observability. By being tethered to the PS-PL coherence port, a PL-located “backstabbing module” 

is made part of the coherence domain. As such, its interaction with the PS changes. Typically, following the coherence pro-tocol, the backstabbing module is snooped by the CCI upon a PS-located LLC refill. Then, the CCI expects the module to indicates whether it possesses a local copy of the requested cache line. The key idea of coherence backstabbing is to design a module that can (i) unilaterally decided to pretend possessing a local copy of the requested cache line and (ii) an-swer with manufactured data. The data can be either made up or originating from another memory source (i.e., à-la PLIM) as demonstrated in [32]. 

# 3 Memory Semantic Transformation 

We now introduce the notion of memory semantic transfor-mation , which allows arbitrary access mapping for multi-dimensional objects stored in memory. 

Intuition. In traditional computing paradigms, programmers must first commit to a data layout and then write algorithms to account for said layout. Indeed, the data address calculation logic is intertwined with the very logic that captures algorith-mic semantics. Moreover, since the same data objects can undergo different processing steps, it is often the case that the selected data layout is not the optimal one for every step. To achieve the desired performance level, algorithms then un-dergo costly optimization rounds, often involving temporary data re-layout. In this paper, we propose to fundamentally decouple core algorithmic semantics from data access semantics. At an in-tuitive level, consider an algorithm that requires access to a set of data items. If algorithmic and data semantics are decoupled, algorithm designers can focus on describing the operation required on the following data item(s), assuming that semantically subsequent items are positionally sequential. To this end, we propose the following. First, data is placed in memory in a given/arbitrary layout, which is perhaps the 3most natural way to represent the data at hand. Next, a hard-ware engine, namely TME, is given access to the raw memory object and to a access pattern specification that encodes the structure of data accesses following high-level algorithmic semantics. Finally, the algorithm on the processor (CPU or otherwise) accesses subsequent items required for the process-ing at hand as if they were contiguously placed in memory. The responsibility of making said items appear contiguous upon access via on-the-fly re-organization is left to the TME. 

Formalization. Let us consider the interface that needs to be provided by the TME in order to perform algorithmic/data decoupling. We refer to the data space visible to the high-level algorithm as exported by the TME as the reorganized data space ; we refer to the raw object accessed by the TME as the 

non-reorganized data space .TME must receive transaction requests targeting the re-organized data space. These transactions access s bytes at an offset o from an object-specific base address a. We can therefore indicate the generic transaction as Ta,o,s. The ob-ject a (and thus the transaction) is also associated with a pre-established access pattern specification C. Given these two elements, TME must perform a scattered access within the non-reorganized data space to extract a data item Ds of s

bytes. If TME is placed downstream from the processor-side caches, s is equal to the cache line size. Extracting Ds given the input transaction Ta,o,s is divided into three subproblems, namely (1) address decomposition , (2) memory access , and (3) result aggregation .The address decomposition is the process of translating the transaction Ta,o,s in the reorganized data space into a series of smaller transactions into the non-reorganized data space following the specification C:

fdecomp : Ta,o,s ×C 7 → { Tb,o0,s′ , . . . , Tb,on,s′ }. (1) 

Ta,o,s is decomposed into a series of n + 1 smaller requests of size s′ < s each and such that s = s′ · (n + 1). All these requests target an object in the non-reorganized data space with base address b, while the various offsets o0, . . . , on are derived from the specification C as explained in the remainder of this section. Next, TME performs a series of parallel memory accesses 

following the decomposition step. This yields n + 1 data frag-ments of size s′ each, thus: 

fmem : {Tb,o0,s′ , . . . , Tb,on,s′ } 7 → { Ds′ 

> 0

, . . . , Ds′ 

> n

} (2) Finally, result aggregation constructs a full cacheline of data 

Ds from the individual fragments extracted in the previous steps, formally: 

faggr : {Ds′ 

> 0

, . . . , Ds′ 

> n

} 7 → Ds (3) It follows that the end-to-end behavior of TME can be defined as the composition of the three steps: 

fT ME : Ta,o,s ×C 7 → Ds = ( fdecomp ◦ fmem ◦ faggr )( Ta,o,s,C)

(4) 

Access Pattern Specifications. Any object in reorganized data space is associated with an access pattern specification 

C that determines how subsequent reorganized data items map to data items in the non-reorganized data space. In this paper, we propose specifications for multi-dimensional stride patterns that can encode any repeating access pattern within a homogeneous multi-dimensional array (tensor). An ( N + 1 )-dimensional access pattern specification is an ordered set of N + 1 tuples of the form: 

C : (ωN , σN , wN ), . . . , (ω0, σ0, w0), (5) where each tuple describes a move in the i-th dimension with 

i ∈ { 0, . . . , N}. Specifically, ωi represents an initial offset to apply on the i-th dimension; σi represents the size of an in-crement along the i-th dimension; and wi corresponds to the length of the i-th dimension. By employing this specification, the TME can translate any linear offset o from the base address a in the incoming transaction Ta,o,s into a set of per-dimension offsets ci as follows: 

ci = ωi +



o/

> i−1

# ∏

> j=0

w j



%wi, (6) where "/" and "%" denote the integer division and modulo operation, respectively. Finally, the first chunk of data to be retrieved from the non-reorganized data space will have offset 

o0 from the base address b that can be computed as: 

o0 =

> N

# ∑

> j=0

ciσi. (7) If the original transactions requested s bytes while the size of an individual element in the non-reorganized tensor has size s′,such that s/s′ = n + 1, the remaining n offsets o1, . . . , on can be easily computed. This is done by iteratively incrementing the per-dimension offsets ci’s while respecting the dimension lengths wi’s and then re-computing Eq. 7. 

Concrete Examples. To better understand TME specifica-tions and its operation, consider a (2-dimensional) 4 × 5 ma-trix stored in the row-wise format in main memory in con-secutive addresses starting at base address b, as per Fig. 1(a). Assume that each cacheline (color coded) includes s = 4 data items of some base data item size s′. This could be 1 for int8 ,4 for int32 and so on. Consider now the trivial case in which the processor wants to access the matrix in the same way in which it is stored using TME. In this case, the reorganized data space base address 

a1 is registered along with the specification C1 = ( 0, 1, 20 ).The 1-dimensional stride C1 accesses the matrix linearly. For instance, the first cacheline request Ta1,0,4 will be decomposed into Tb,0,s′ , Tb,1,s′ , Tb,2,s′ , Tb,3,s′ .More interestingly, consider the case in which the pro-cessor wants to access the transpose of the matrix while 40 1 2 3 4

# 5 6 7 8 9

# 10 11 12 13 14 

# 15 16 17 18 19   

> (a) Row-wise 4 ×5 Matrix

# 0 5 10 15 

# 1 6 11 16 

# 2 7 12 17 

# 3 8 13 18 

# 4 9 14 19   

> (b) Transpose (5 ×4)

# 6 7 8

# 11 12 13   

> (c) Inner 2 ×3 Matrix

# 6 11 

# 7 12 

# 8 13   

> (d) Inner Transp. (2 ×3)

Figure 1: Logic view of target matrix (a) stored row-wise in memory and occupying 5 cachelines (color-coded). Layouts visible through TME when accessing (b) its transpose view, (c) its inner 3 × 2 matrix, and (d) the transpose of the inner 3 × 2 matrix. keeping the data in the row-wise format. This can be ac-complished by registering a new address a2 with config-uration C2 = ( 0, 1, 4), (0, 5, 4). In this case, Ta2,0,4 will be decomposed into { Tb,0,s′ , Tb,5,s′ , Tb,10 ,s′ , Tb,15 ,s′ }, next Ta2,4,4

into { Tb,1,s′ , Tb,6,s′ , Tb,11 ,s′ , Tb,16 ,s′ }, and so on, as shown in Fig. 1(b). By increasing the dimensionality of the stride, more complex patterns can be obtained. For instance, one can access the 2 × 3 sub-matrix in the center of the orig-inal matrix (Fig. 1(c)). This can be done with C3 =(1, 5, 1), (1, 1, 1), (0, 5, 2), (0, 1, 3) which yields the follow-ing transaction decomposition for the first cacheline access: {Tb,6,s′ , Tb,7,s′ , Tb,8,s′ , Tb,11 ,s′ }. Similarly, the transposed inner matrix depicted in Fig. 1(d) can be accessed with the configu-ration C4 = ( 1, 5, 1), (1, 1, 1), (0, 1, 3), (0, 5, 2).In the following sections, we describe the design and im-plementation of TME, describing in greater detail how ac-cess pattern specifications are encoded; how processor-side requests are intercepted; and how decomposition, memory access, and result aggregation are efficiently implemented. 

# 4 System Overview 

In this section, we describe the software and hardware layers of the proposed system. The software layer is implemented as a combination of Linux kernel-level drivers and user-space libraries. The hardware layer is implemented in the PL and 

Figure 2: Overview of the system organization. seamlessly interacts with the PS-side caches by leveraging the PLIM paradigm—see Section 2. 

Software layer. We propose a set of APIs that allow end users to leverage TME easily and without specialized knowl-edge. Said API is intentionally made opaque to abstract away hardware-specific technical details. This is achieved by im-plementing a two-layer user/kernel software stack. The highest level of abstraction, in the user-space, provides end-users a way to describe dense data structures and target re-organization specification(s) in a form that closely follows that presented in Section 3. The lowest level of abstraction corresponds to the TME driver implemented as a Linux kernel module. The driver communicates directly with the TME (i.e., hardware layer). At the driver level, the user configuration is translated into a 

“hardware specific” and “hardware friendly” representation. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the routing of memory transactions through the TME module is elective. It means that accesses that do not require re-organization can reach memory using the usual data path, whereas, when explicitly deemed appro-priate by the end-user, selected tensors can be presented to the PEs as re-organized by accessing the TME API. The latter will ensure the re-routing of the PE-originated traffic through the TME module. Let us consider the example in Fig. 2 of a matrix multiplication C = A × B where the matrices A and 

B are stored as row-major. Only B needs to be re-organized (here transposed) to allow the matrix multiplication to be performed as a dot product. Further details on the API are provided in Section 3. 

Hardware layer. TME is integrated within the system cache coherence via an interface linking the PL with the PS co-herence fabric (e.g., ACE, TileLink). Fig. 2 illustrates such integration. The PE’s requests emitted in 1 are sent to all coherent actors following the snoop-based coherence mech-anism 2 . TME decides whether to handle the request and informs the coherent fabric in 3 of its decision. If accepted, 5Figure 3: Abstract overview of TME’s integration in a PS-PL platform as part of the coherent domain and accessed only upon TME’s decision. No assumptions on the bus protocol (e.g., ACE, AXI) and PL’s location (e.g., on- or off-chip) are made. TME sends the requests to the memory as non-cached through the coherent interface, effectively accessing the data using the usual data path 4 . Once the re-organized cacheline is ready, it is forwarded to the PEs via the coherent interface 5 . Overall, TME centralizes all memory interaction on a single interface. Note that TME can also be integrated as a memory-mapped target. However, in such case, the selectiveness aspect is lost, and two ports are required (a subordinate and a main) as the module becomes a “passthrough” .

# 5 TME Architecture 

We now present in detail the internal architecture of the pro-posed Tensor Memory Engine. For clarity, a summary of the architectural parameters is available in Table 1. 

Overview. The TME architecture illustrated in Fig. 4 is com-posed of eight modules and two bus ports. One of the ports is used by the PS to indicate to TME how to re-organize the data flowing through. In our prototype, this is achieved by writing with IO transactions to a set of PL-located memory-mapped registers connected to the PS via an AXI bus. The second port is in charge of intercepting transactions that fall within the memory ranges of interest. In our prototype, this port is coherent and included in the PS coherency domain using the ACE protocol. Table 1: TME’s main architectural configuration parameters: shorthand notation and description. Notation Description 

Nmax Amount of dimensions that TME can handle (i.e., supports the re-organization). 

Mmax Amount of simultaneous outstanding transac-tion that can be handled by the Monitor. 

Lmax Memory-level parallelism of the memory tar-geted by TME to fetch the re-organized cache-lines pieces. 

D Amount of re-organization patterns simultane-ously supported by a TME implementation. 

Figure 4: TME’s architecture overview. The ACE port is used for both capturing transactions of interest and (Snoop channels) and fetch data from memory (AXI channels). The performance monitoring unit is omitted for readability. 

# 5.1 Components 

Configuration port. The configuration port is a central com-ponent of TME that stores all operands required to apply the manipulations described in Section 3. It is composed of two arrays: a validity array and a descriptor array. Each array has a depth (noted D) equal to the amount of re-organization pat-terns simultaneously supported by TME. The validity array is a set of booleans indicating whether the corresponding set of descriptor entries is “in use”. The descriptor array stores the re-organization patterns as sets of Nmax entries. The arrays’ content can be read and written via an AXI port tethered to one of the memory-mapped PS-PL AXI interfaces. Entries are 

(i) allocated and populated by the API before any re-organized cache line requests are made, and (ii) cleared by the API when the re-organized accesses are completed. 

Trapper. The trapper is the first module on the data path. It receives and, when applicable, handles snoop commands (i.e., transactions) coming from the PS. The module determines 6whether to handle the transaction by comparing the transac-tion’s address against a set of configured address ranges. Each range corresponds to a registered object in the re-organized data space. If the snoop address falls within one of the ranges, TME informs the PS that it will handle the request. Other-wise, it issues a “snoop miss” . Upon handling a transaction, a few pieces of metadata—request address, WRAP , ID —are ex-tracted and passed to the next module. The trapper module is also in charge of transforming the responses into transactions compliant with the ACE protocol. 

Monitor. The monitor module occupies a central role in the operation of TME as it orchestrates the incoming and out-going transactions. It receives the several pieces of a “re-organized cache-line” in any order but must respond to PE-originated transactions with completed cache-lines in the ex-act order they arrived, effectively implementing result ag-gregation ( faggr , see Eq. 3) as per Section 3. The module operates as a Re-order Buffer (ROB) to respect the system’s cache coherence interconnect. Indeed, the latter expects to receive in-order responses while TME allows the out-of-order retrieval of partial data to achieve higher overall throughput. The ROB also stores the incoming transactions’ informa-tion and is flanked with a data array that holds the partially constructed (i.e., unfinished) re-organized cache-line(s). The monitor can simultaneously handle up to Mmax outstanding transactions. 

Preparator. This module is in charge of decomposing the re-organized data space offset o of an incoming transac-tion Ta,o,s buffer into per-dimension offsets c0, . . . , cN re-quired to fetch the various cacheline fragments within the non-reorganized data space. This operation corresponds to a hardware-optimized calculation of Eq. 6. Specifically, it is im-plemented as a pipeline to allow for the parallelization of the 

Nmax successive division and modulo operations. For each op-eration, the preparator looks up and fetches its operands from the configuration port using the configuration ID retrieved by the trapper and passed along by the monitor. 

Request Descriptors Generator. As its name suggests, based on the set of dimension offsets c0, . . . , cN computed by the preparator, the Request Descriptors Generator (or RDG) generates a sequence of transaction descriptors 2 that encode which memory location will be read. The first mem-ory location corresponds to the base address of the non-reorganized object b plus the offset of the first data item 

o0, computed as per Eq. 7. The RDG then generates one new sub-transaction descriptor every clock cycle, for n clock cycles—once again, n = ( s/s′ − 1). Thus, at each clock cy-cle, a new sub-transaction of the form Tb,oi,s′ is formed and queued downstream at the Fetch Unit. 

Fetch Unit. The Fetch Unit module is in charge of (i) forming requests that can be transformed into well-formed bus trans-actions (i.e., here AXI) based on the transaction descriptors 

> 2Note that the module uses descriptors to remain protocol agnostic.

produced by the RDG. This step corresponds to requesting the data fragment Ds′ 

> i

from the generic descriptor Tb,oi,s′ ; (ii) stor-ing the request descriptors until the corresponding responses are delivered and (iii) , upon reception of these responses, retrieving the data of interest and aligning with its future loca-tion in the re-ordered cache-line, thus reconstructing the full 

Ds for the original request Ta,o,s originated from the processor. As the target memory may provide different response times for each request 3, the module must be capable to handle re-ordered individual fragments’ responses. To this end, the mod-ule implements a transaction ID allocation table . Typically, the module allocates a dedicated transaction ID to each incom-ing request descriptor and stores RDG-generated metadata for later. Upon the reception of a transaction’s response, the meta-data is retrieved from the table using the ID of the response. The metadata is used to isolate the data of interest from the response and align it to its future location (i.e., offset) within the re-organized cache line. The depth of the table is set to the same value as the targets’ MLP (noted Lmax ). 

# 5.2 Example: In-TME Request Life Cycle 

This subsection describes the TME’s internal operations that occur between the reception of a snoop command and the transmission of the re-organized cache line to the CCI. The life cycle of a request within TME is as follows. Upon a LLC refill ( 2 in Fig. 3 and Section 4), the CCI snoops the PS-PL coherence port, initiating interaction with TME’s Trapper module A . The latter determines whether to handle the request by looking up the configuration port’s validity array B . Providing a negative outcome, the TME in-dicates the CCI that it does not want to handle the request (i.e., it does not possess a local copy). Otherwise, TME answers positively to the CCI and forwards the snoop request’s address (i.e., reorg_addr in Fig. 4) to the Monitor C . The Monitor 

(i) allocates an entry in the ROB for the new request, (ii) stores collected metadata (e.g., WRAP ) in the ROB, and (iii) passes on the request to the Preparator D . Hitherto completion, the entry’s position within the ROB is internally used as an ID 

to identify the request (i.e., request_ID in Fig. 4). Together, the preparator and the RDG translate the reorg_addr into a sequence of T descriptors (i.e., RDG descriptor in Fig. 4) as explained earlier E F . Each transaction descriptor is then 

(i) inserted in the Fetch-unit’s allocation table G , (ii) trans-formed into an AXI transaction, and (iii) placed on the ACE port H ( 4 in Fig. 3 and Section 4). Upon reception of a response i , the RDG descriptor is retrieved from the table and used to isolate the data of interest from the response pay-load j . Then, the result is forwarded to the Monitor, where the data is inserted in the partially constructed cache line and the associated counter incremented K . Whenever the counter indicates a completed re-organized cache line, and that cache line is the oldest in the ROB, the cache line is forwarded to 

> 3e.g., if interacting with a caching hierarchy.

7the Trapper L and placed on the ACE bus M ( 5 in Fig. 3 and Sec. 4). 

# 6 Evaluation 

In this section, we evaluate the performance of TME utilizing a set of benchmarks representing common vision/AI and data manipulation workloads. 

# 6.1 Experimental Methodology 

System Setup. For hardware, we use the AMD-Xilinx Ultra-Scale+ Kria KR260 platform equipped with (i) a quad-core ARM Cortex-A53 CPU clocked at 1.3 GHz, (ii) a tightly inte-grated programmable FPGA fabric, (iii) 1 MB of L2 cache, and (iv) 4 GB of 2400 MT/s DDR4. TME is implemented on the PL and operates at 300 MHz. As discussed in Section 5, it interacts with the PS via one AXI interface for configuration and one ACE interface for re-organized data accesses. For the operating system, we use Ubuntu 22.04, provided by AMD-Xilinx [1] (Linux kernel v6.2), on top of which we run all our experiments. To provide easy access to perfor-mance counters, we employ the RT-Bench [27] framework when running the benchmarks. Unless mentioned otherwise, all benchmarks are compiled with GCC v11.4.0, -O2 opti-mizations, and auto-vectorization flags 4 when applicable. 

Benchmarks. For benchmarks, we use a set of workloads that involve various tensor manipulations, as described below. 

Im2col. Convolutions underpin modern CNN workloads, motivating substantial effort to optimize both computation and data movement [19, 23, 44]. A widely used implementa-tion strategy is Im2col , which reshapes the input feature maps so that convolution can be performed as a GEMM. While this approach leverages highly optimized linear-algebra kernels, it incurs significant data movement: for modest kernel sizes 

(5 × 5), the expanded matrix can exceed the input size by 

∼ 25 ×. TME eliminates this overhead by forgoing explicit materialization of the Im2col matrix. Instead, it generates the required layout on-the-fly and delivers data to the process-ing elements in precisely the order expected by the GEMM kernel. To illustrate the benefit, we evaluate a 1024×1024 grayscale input with a 2×2 convolution filter, comparing a conventional CPU Im2col implementation against a TME variant that constructs the convolution matrix on demand. 

Conv2D. This benchmark is a naive implementation of 2D convolution with a single filter, where the filter is applied using a simple nested-loop strategy. On TME, this benchmark applies the convolution to a TME-assisted layout that ensures each subsequent datum is presented in sequential order, main-taining optimal data locality and effectively flattening the base image to match the convolution pattern. To enable compari-

> 4-funroll-loops -ftree-vectorize

son with Im2col, we again use a 1024 × 1024 grayscale input with a 2 × 2 convolution filter. 

Permutation. A permutation operation reorders the axes— and thus the logical strides—of a tensor. Because strided accesses over a tensor result in irregular memory access, it is common to physically reshape the tensor to improve lo-cality, albeit at the cost of substantial data movement, be-fore processing it. In this benchmark, we permute a tensor of shape (N, H,W,C), representing a batch of N images of size H × W with C channels each. The tensor is re-shaped as a (N,C, H,W ) tensor, effectively removing color channel interleaving. We then apply a 2 × 2 convolution filter as in Conv2D. We set N = 8 , C = 3 , and H = W = 512 . On TME, the permutation operation is carried out transparently on-the-fly. On the baseline CPU, however, the reordered tensor must be physically materialized in memory before being passed to the convolution kernel. 

Unfolding. A tensor unfolding operation converts a higher-order tensor into a matrix by rearranging its elements such that one axis becomes the rows of the result and all remaining axes collapse into columns. For example, consider a tensor 

χ ∈ R2×3×4. A mode-1 unfolding of χ yields the shape (2, 12 ),a mode-2 unfolding yields the shape (3, 8), while a mode-3 unfolding yields the shape (4, 6). More generally, for an N-order tensor, χ ∈ RI1×I2×... ×IN , the mode-k unfolding yields 

χ(k) ∈ R(Ik)×(I1×I2×... ×Ik−1×Ik+1... ×IN ). For this experiment, we consider a tensor χ1 ∈ R8×64 ×64 ×128 and a 2-order tensor (matrix) χ2 ∈ R64 ×65536 . We first unfold χ1 in mode-3 such that its dimensions align with those of χ2, and then compute the Hadamard product [20] between the resulting matrices. The unfolding of χ1 is carried out either explicitly on the CPU or implicitly on-the-fly by TME. 

Batch2Space. This operation is applied to a tensor whose batch dimension encodes subdivided spatial data. It rearranges this data by moving elements out of the batch dimension and into the spatial dimensions, producing an output tensor with enlarged spatial dimensions and a reduced batch size. This operation is common in real-world ML and signal processing workflows [10, 39]. For this experiment, we instantiate an image batch with dimensions (N, H,W,C), where N = 8, H =

W = 64 , and C = 3. We perform the Batch2Space operation to collapse them into a single 128 × 256 image. This is done na ¨lively by moving data with the CPU, and then using on-the-fly re-organization via TME. A 2 × 2 convolution filter is then applied to the resulting image. 

MatMul. In this benchmark, we multiply two 2048 × 2048 square matrices. We pre-transpose the second matrix either via the CPU or through a TME-assisted re-layout. For multipli-cation, we utilize a recursive divide-and-conquer strategy [9]. 

Slicing. Tensor Slicing is a multi-dimensional generaliza-tion of array slicing. For this experiment we take a base tensor 

χ ∈ RR1×R2×R3×R4 . We perform a strided slice of the base ten-sor to get χ′ ∈ R(R1/2)×(R2/4)×(R3/2)×(R4/64 ). This is achieved by accessing along each dimension, starting with a null off-8set, with strides (S1, S2, S3, S4) = ( 2, 4, 2, 64 ). For our exper-iments, we set (R1, R2, R3, R4) = ( 64 , 64 , 64 , 512 ). We then take a Hadamard product of χ′ and a secondary tensor with the same shape. We perform this operation via TME and compare it with in-place access on the CPU. In this case, we found that the TME approach was much faster than explicitly materializing the sliced tensor. 

# 6.2 Speedup and Working Set Size Reduction 

We first evaluate TME’s effects on performance and mem-ory footprint using the aforementioned tensor manipulation benchmarks. Fig. 5 shows the results. 

Speeding Up Tensor Layout Transforms by Avoiding Ma-terialization. Im2col , Conv2D , Batch2Space , Unfold , Permu-tation , and the transpose in MatMul are all transformations that require a reorganization of large tensors into new views, which in the baseline implementation results in substantial memory movement and a significant increase in transient WSS. TME improves the performance of these workloads by eliminating the materialization cost of these transient tensor views and by exposing the desired layout directly to the CPU. This means that the explicit transformation operations disap-pear entirely from the critical path: no intermediate buffer is allocated, filled, or written back. As a result, Unfold , Per-mutation , and Batch2Space see a 1.15 ×, 1.15 ×, and 1.11 ×

speedup relative to their CPU-only baseline, while Im2Col 

shows the largest improvement at 1.35 ×—see Fig. 5a. In the case of MatMul , the O(n3) matrix multiplication time domi-nates the time of the O(n2) transpose, and little-to-no benefit is seen in the execution time, but we still see a significant de-crease in WSS. The benefit of TME is particularly significant for Im2Col because the output representation is much larger than the input tensor, and the materialization cost often dwarfs the compute time of the succeeding GEMM. By eliminating this inflated intermediate representation, TME reduces pres-sure on the memory hierarchy, reduces WSS, and prevents bandwidth from being monopolized by data rearrangement, as shown in Fig. 5b. 

TME Improves Slicing by Converting it to a Streaming Access Pattern. Slicing achieves a 1.77 × speedup relative to the CPU baseline. In this case, the WSS does not improve because, as mentioned in Section 6.1, instead of materializing an intermediate tensor, we compare to a faster in-place CPU benchmark. Slicing is fundamentally different from the rest of the benchmarks in that it selects only a subset of the base ten-sor, rather than rearranging it. The operation’s strided accesses exhibit worst-case spatial locality, leading to extremely poor cache line utilization. Only a small portion of the retrieved lines contains data that will be used, resulting in a severely inefficient use of memory bandwidth and cache space. Fur-thermore, because the strides are nested, the access pattern exhibits low prefetchability and fails to form a stable stream, leading to increased memory access latency. With TME, both of these issues are addressed simultaneously. TME can com-pose and present lines filled with useful data to the cache hier-archy, achieving optimal locality. Additionally, by linearizing the useful data, nested multi-dimensional strided accesses are eliminated, making the streams simple and prefetcher-friendly. This latter effect is particularly significant as it effec-tively hides the increased memory access latency incurred by TME [38]. The synergy of improved cacheline utilization and high prefetchability enables TME-executed Slicing to transi-tion from a pathological access pattern to a streaming access pattern, yielding the largest speedup in the set. 

The Cost of Misaligned Tensor Layouts in Conv2D. Fi-nally, Conv2D sees a slightly worse performance relative to the baseline. In this experiment, while the TME-based ap-proach applies a flattening procedure superficially similar to 

Im2col , the resulting layout does not align well with the shape required by optimized GEMM routines. We effectively dupli-cate data items and, because of their format, cannot operate on them with SIMD instructions. As such, the unfolded layout forces the system to move a larger volume of data across the memory hierarchy per operation, increasing the bandwidth consumed along the TME–DRAM path. This negative result indicates that proper algorithm co-design principles must be adhered to when using TME. Next, we examine the bandwidth limitations along the TME-DRAM path in more detail. 

TME as a Request Multiplier: DRAM Bandwidth Impli-cations. We now investigate the effective memory bandwidth between TME and DRAM. We utilize the Bandwidth [40] benchmark, which sequentially accesses a large array, to point to a TME-provided layout with various element sizes. Fig. 6 shows the results. Note that the in-graph annotations denote the dimensionality of each TME configuration. TME effectively functions as a request multiplier: a sin-gle upstream cache line request is expanded into multiple fine-grained scatter-gather accesses that are composed into a contiguous cache line. Critically, DRAM devices are op-timized for cache line–sized accesses. An AXI read request from TME for a sub-cache line payload (e.g., 8 bytes) is not distinguished by the DRAM circuitry. Instead, it is handled internally as a full-burst access, with granularity effects only enforced when the memory controller returns data in accor-dance with the AXI specification. This means that although TME extracts less data, it still incurs the full latency cost. The number of transactions required by TME to compose a 64-bytes cache line is equal to n = 64 bytes element _size . For small element sizes (e.g., uint8 /1 byte), 64 separate transactions to DRAM are required for TME to compose a single cache line. Each of these transactions must incur the normal DRAM latency, leading to a substantial reduction in achievable bandwidth on the TME-DRAM path. As the element size increases, fewer total transactions are needed to compose a cache line, and TME-DRAM bandwidth increases. This bandwidth limitation delineates the situations in which TME can be used effec-tively and must be accounted for in the algorithm co-design 9Im2col Conv2D Permutation Unfolding Batch2Space MatMul Slicing 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> 1.6
> 1.8
> Speedup
> Speedup of TME over CPU baseline
> CPU
> TME

(a) Speedup of TME benchmarks relative to their CPU counterpart Im2col Conv2D Permutation Unfolding Batch2Space MatMul Slicing  

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> 1.6
> 1.8
> Normalized WSS
> TME WSS over CPU baseline
> CPU
> TME

(b) TME benchmark WSS normalized to their CPU counterpart 

Figure 5: TME is able to offer (i) speedup by eliminating transformation time (Fig. 5a) and (ii) ideal locality decrease transient working set size (WSS) by avoiding materialization of intermediate layouts (Fig. 5b). 16 32 64 128    

> Tensor size (MB)
> 100
> 200
> 300
> 400
> 500
> 600
> Bandwidth (MB/s)
> 2
> 34
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 2
> 3
> 4
> TME bandwidth across element sizes
> uint8_t uint16_t uint32_t uint64_t

Figure 6: For smaller element sizes, more TME-DRAM trans-actions are necessary to compose a cache line, effectively limiting bandwidth along the TME-DRAM path. phase. Importantly, this bandwidth degradation is not inherent to on-the-fly data reorganization as a paradigm, but rather an artifact of interfacing with commodity DRAM controllers optimized for cache line granularity. 

Summary. TME enables the CPU to consume tensor data in the desired logical format without materializing an inter-mediate data layout. This eliminates the storage and latency overheads associated with explicit data transformation. Be-yond eliminating in-memory materialization of reorganized objects, TME fundamentally reshapes memory behavior by converting irregular, multidimensional access patterns into linearized streams that align properly with cache hierarchies and simple hardware prefetchers typical of edge nodes. Our evaluation demonstrates that while many tensor trans-formations benefit from removing materialization overhead, the largest gains arise when TME improves memory-system efficiency by maximizing cacheline utilization and prefetch coverage. These results highlight TME’s potential as a general hardware–software co-design for accelerating data-intensive workloads whose performance is dominated by memory ac-cess behavior rather than computation. 

# 7 Discussion 

One of our observations from our experiments is that TME effectively acts as a request multiplier for some workloads on commodity DRAM, where a single cache-line request from the CPU is decomposed into multiple sub-cache-line gathers, each of which still incurs full-burst cache-line size access to DRAM. For small element sizes, this behavior can reduce effective bandwidth on the TME–DRAM path, even though the data reorganization itself is conceptually efficient. We next discuss a possible avenue for mitigating this by co-designing TME’s access patterns with the underlying memory system. 

On-the-fly reorganization with new memory technolo-gies Looking forward, these constraints could be substan-tially alleviated by adapting memory controllers and DRAM devices to support variable or finer-grained burst lengths. This direction aligns with recent trends in custom and near-memory technologies [15, 26], heterogeneous memory archi-tectures [3, 6, 17], and research on dynamic, fine-granularity DRAM access [28, 43], as well as commercial designs with reduced burst lengths [13]. In future work, we plan to explore TME-like modules and on-the-fly data transformation under emerging memory technologies that better match TME’s ac-commodate patterns. 

RISC-V and ASIC Integration Another potential avenue to alleviate TME–DRAM bandwidth constraints is to integrate TME as an ASIC in a system-on-chip, allowing it to operate at a higher frequency and thereby improving its ability to extract more DRAM bandwidth. Toward this goal, we are actively 10 exploring the integration of TME into an open-source RISC-V SoC. Such integration also opens the door to leveraging RISC-V’s extensible ISA for tighter architecture-level coupling with TME, which we plan to investigate in future work. 

# 8 Related Work 

Data Locality and Tensor Layouts. Systems such as TVM [8] focus on operator- and graph-level scheduling (tiling, fusion, vectorization, memory scoping) to produce hardware-efficient kernels across diverse backends. However, these sys-tems ultimately realize layout transformations by explicitly materializing intermediate tensors or by carefully scheduled loops in software, thus still pushing all data reorganization through the conventional cache/memory hierarchy. In con-trast, TME moves layout transformation into the memory path itself, exporting locality-optimized cache lines while leaving the logical tensor program and CPU execution model unchanged. 

Processing-In-Memory. Processing-in-memory (PIM) and near-data computing reduce data movement by colocating simple computation with memory arrays or stacked mem-ory [22]. DRAM-centric proposals such as Ambit perform bulk bitwise operations directly inside DRAM by exploiting internal analog behavior, achieving large gains for bitmap and bitset workloads at the cost of DRAM design changes and a fixed operation set [36]. Other near-memory accelerators in 3D-stacked or HBM-style memories similarly target spe-cific primitives (e.g., reductions, convolutions) [25]. These approaches are powerful but typically (i) require specialized memory devices or non-standard DRAM interfaces, and (ii) 

expose relatively rigid compute kernels rather than general, layout-centric transformations over high-dimensional objects. TME is complementary: it assumes commodity DRAM and standard controllers, places logic on an SoC/FPGA fabric, and focuses on programmable cache line-level reorganization rather than adding arithmetic units inside memory arrays. 

FPGA In-the-Middle and Near-Data Transformation. Our design builds on the emerging idea of inserting reconfig-urable logic directly in the memory path of SoC platforms. Programmable Logic In-the-Middle (PLIM) [35] and CAE-SAR [32] show that an on-chip FPGA can sit between CPU clusters and main memory while remaining cache coherent, enabling fine-grained manipulation of memory traffic for re-source management and QoS. Relational Memory (RME) leverages a similar SoC/FPGA setup to provide native, near-data projection: it transparently transforms row-wise base data into arbitrary column-groups on the fly, exposing both row and column access as if they were natively stored [34]. TME generalizes this class of designs from relational projections to arbitrary dense tensor layouts. Unlike PLIM/CAESAR, which targets control and routing of memory requests, or RME, which focuses on row/column projections for database tuples, TME is explicitly architected as a tensor-centric cache line composer that supports a wide range of reshape, gather, and permutation patterns while maintaining a PE-agnostic interface to the CPU. 

# 9 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce the Tensor Memory Engine, a hard-ware–software co-designed approach that decouples compu-tation from data layout (re)organization to improve locality in data-intensive applications. TME transparently reorganizes data on the CPU memory path without duplication, dynami-cally serving optimized cache lines to improve spatiotemporal locality. We implement TME on SoC/FPGA hardware, and our evaluation demonstrates that TME significantly enhances cache efficiency and performance without requiring applica-tion changes. By enabling dynamic data layouts and reducing the burden of manual tuning, TME provides a practical path toward more efficient memory systems for next-generation edge and data-intensive workloads. 

# References 

[1] Install Ubuntu on AMD | Ubuntu — ubuntu.com. ht tps://ubuntu.com/download/amd#kria-k26 . [Ac-cessed 11-12-2025]. [2] Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghe-mawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp, Geoffrey Irv-ing, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dan-delion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Mur-ray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vin-cent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems, 2015. Software available from tensorflow.org. URL: 

https://www.tensorflow.org/ .[3] Neha Agarwal, David Nellans, Mark Stephenson, Mike O’Connor, and Stephen W. Keckler. Page placement strategies for gpus within heterogeneous memory sys-tems. ASPLOS ’15, page 607–618, New York, NY, USA, 2015. Association for Computing Machinery. 

doi:10.1145/2694344.2694381 .[4] G. Alonso, T. Roscoe, D. Cock, M. Ewaida, Kaan Kara, Dario Korolija, D. Sidler, and Ze ke Wang. Tackling hardware/software co-design from a database perspec-tive. In Conference on Innovative Data Systems Re-search (CIDR) , Amsterdam, Netherlands, Jan. 2020. 11 [5] ARM. AMBA AXI and ACE Protocol Specification. Technical report, 2013. URL: https://developer.ar m.com/documentation/ihi0022/e/ .[6] Evgeny Bolotin, David Nellans, Oreste Villa, Mike O’Connor, Alex Ramirez, and Stephen W. Keckler. De-signing efficient heterogeneous memory architectures. 

IEEE Micro , 35(4):60–68, 2015. doi:10.1109/MM.2 015.72 .[7] Ting-Jung Chang, Ang Li, Fei Gao, Tuan Ta, Georgios Tziantzioulis, Yanghui Ou, Moyang Wang, Jinzheng Tu, Kaifeng Xu, Paul J. Jackson, August Ning, Grigory Chirkov, Marcelo Orenes-Vera, Shady Agwa, Xiaoyu Yan, Eric Tang, Jonathan Balkind, Christopher Batten, and David Wentzlaff. Cifer: A 12nm, 16mm2, 22-core soc with a 1541 lut6/mm2 1.92 mops/lut, fully synthe-sizable, cachecoherent, embedded fpga. In 2023 IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conference (CICC) , pages 1– 2, 2023. doi:10.1109/CICC57935.2023.10121294 .[8] Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Q. Yan, Haichen Shen, Meghan Cowan, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. TVM: an automated end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learning. In An-drea C. Arpaci-Dusseau and Geoff Voelker, editors, 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2018, Carlsbad, CA, USA, Octo-ber 8-10, 2018 , pages 578–594. USENIX Association, 2018. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conferenc e/osdi18/presentation/chen .[9] Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction to Algorithms, Third Edition . The MIT Press, 3rd edition, 2009. [10] TensorFlow Developers. tf.batch_to_space. https: //www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/ba tch_to_space , 2025. Accessed: 2025-12-01. [11] Nastaran Hajinazar, Geraldo F. Oliveira, Sven Grego-rio, João Ferreira, Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Minesh Patel, Mohammed Alser, Saugata Ghose, Juan Gómez Luna, and Onur Mutlu. Simdram: An end-to-end framework for bit-serial simd computing in dram, 2021. URL: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.12839 , arXiv: 2105.12839 .[12] Denis Hoornaert, Shahin Roozkhosh, Renato Mancuso, and Marco Caccamo. Work in progress: Identifying unexpected inter-core interference induced by shared cache. In 2021 IEEE 27th Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS) , pages 517–520, 2021. doi:10.1109/RTAS52030.2021.000 66 .[13] Intel. 3.5. RLDRAM II and RLDRAM 3 Features. http s://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/p rogrammable/710283/17-0/rldram-ii-and-rld ram-3-features.html , 2025. Accessed: 2025-12-01. [14] Intel, Corp. Intel’s Stratix 10 FPGA: Supporting the smart and connected revolution, October 2016. Ac-cessed on 2022-01-19. URL: https://newsroom .intel.com/editorials/intels-stratix-10-f pga-supporting-smart-connected-revolution/ .[15] Hongshin Jun, Jinhee Cho, Kangseol Lee, Ho-Young Son, Kwiwook Kim, Hanho Jin, and Keith Kim. Hbm (high bandwidth memory) dram technology and archi-tecture. In 2017 IEEE International Memory Workshop (IMW) , pages 1–4, 2017. doi:10.1109/IMW.2017.7 939084 .[16] Hongbo Kang, Phillip B. Gibbons, Guy E. Blelloch, Laxman Dhulipala, Yan Gu, and Charles McGuffey. The processing-in-memory model. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures , SPAA ’21, page 295–306, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. 

doi:10.1145/3409964.3461816 .[17] Sudarsun Kannan, Ada Gavrilovska, Vishal Gupta, and Karsten Schwan. Heteroos — os design for hetero-geneous memory management in datacenter. In 2017 ACM/IEEE 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) , pages 521–534, 2017. 

doi:10.1145/3079856.3080245 .[18] Liu Ke, Xuan Zhang, Jinin So, Jong-Geon Lee, Shin-Haeng Kang, Sukhan Lee, Songyi Han, YeonGon Cho, Jin Hyun Kim, Yongsuk Kwon, KyungSoo Kim, Jin Jung, Ilkwon Yun, Sung Joo Park, Hyunsun Park, Joonho Song, Jeonghyeon Cho, Kyomin Sohn, Nam Sung Kim, and Hsien-Hsin S. Lee. Near-memory processing in action: Accelerating personalized recommendation with axdimm. IEEE Micro , 42(1):116–127, 2022. doi:10.1 109/MM.2021.3097700 .[19] Hyeonjin Kim, Sungwoo Ahn, Yunho Oh, Bogil Kim, Won Woo Ro, and William J. Song. Duplo: Lifting re-dundant memory accesses of deep neural networks for gpu tensor cores. In 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM In-ternational Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) ,pages 725–737, 2020. doi:10.1109/MICRO50266.2 020.00065 .[20] Tamara G. Kolda and Brett W. Bader. Tensor decompo-sitions and applications. SIAM Review , 51(3):455–500, 2009. doi:10.1137/07070111X .12 [21] Sukhan Lee, Shin-haeng Kang, Jaehoon Lee, Hyeonsu Kim, Eojin Lee, Seungwoo Seo, Hosang Yoon, Seung-won Lee, Kyounghwan Lim, Hyunsung Shin, Jinhyun Kim, O Seongil, Anand Iyer, David Wang, Kyomin Sohn, and Nam Sung Kim. Hardware architecture and soft-ware stack for pim based on commercial dram tech-nology : Industrial product. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architec-ture (ISCA) , pages 43–56, 2021. doi:10.1109/ISCA 52012.2021.00013 .[22] Juan Gómez Luna, Onur Mutlu, and Ataberk Olgun. Real-world Processing-in-Memory Systems for Modern Workloads . https://ev ents.safari.ethz .ch/isca-pim-tutorial/doku.php , 2023. [23] Sangkug Lym, Donghyuk Lee, Mike O’Connor, Niladr-ish Chatterjee, and Mattan Erez. Delta: Gpu perfor-mance model for deep learning applications with in-depth memory system traffic analysis. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS) , page 293–303. IEEE, March 2019. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/I SPASS.2019.00041 , doi:10.1109/ispass.2019.00 041 .[24] Microsemi — Microchip Technology Inc. PolarFire SoC - Lowest Power, Multi-Core RISC-V SoC FPGA, July 2020. Accessed on 09.01.2020. URL: https: //www.microsemi.com/product-directory/soc -fpgas/5498-polarfire-soc-fpga .[25] Onur Mutlu, Saugata Ghose, Juan Gómez-Luna, and Rachata Ausavarungnirun. A Modern Primer on Pro-cessing in Memory. CoRR , abs/2012.03112, 2020. URL: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.03112 .[26] Onur Mutlu, Saugata Ghose, Juan Gómez-Luna, Rachata Ausavarungnirun, Mohammad Sadrosadati, and Ger-aldo F. Oliveira. A modern primer on processing in memory, 2025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012 .03112 , arXiv:2012.03112 .[27] Mattia Nicolella, Shahin Roozkhosh, Denis Hoornaert, Andrea Bastoni, and Renato Mancuso. Rt-bench: an ex-tensible benchmark framework for the analysis and man-agement of real-time applications. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Real-Time Networks and Systems , page 184–195. ACM, June 2022. URL: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3534879.3534888 ,

doi:10.1145/3534879.3534888 .[28] Ataberk Olgun, F. Nisa Bostanci, Geraldo F. Oliveira, Yahya Can Tugrul, Rahul Bera, A. Giray Yaglikci, Hasan Hassan, Oguz Ergin, and Onur Mutlu. Sectored dram: A practical energy-efficient and high-performance fine-grained dram architecture, 2024. URL: https://arxi v.org/abs/2207.13795 , arXiv:2207.13795 .[29] Daniel Pacheco, Miguel Graça, Filipe Borralho, Leonel Sousa, and Aleksandar Ilic. Bridging portability and per-formance in sparse tensor computations using sycl. Con-currency and Computation: Practice and Experience ,37(27-28):e70369, 2025. URL: https://onlinelibr ary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cpe.70369 , ar Xiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pd f/10.1002/cpe.70369 , doi:10.1002/cpe.70369 .[30] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Z. Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chil-amkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. CoRR ,abs/1912.01703, 2019. URL: http://arxiv.org/ abs/1912.01703 , arXiv:1912.01703 .[31] David Patterson, Thomas Anderson, Neal Cardwell, Richard Fromm, Kimberly Keeton, Christoforos Kozyrakis, Randi Thomas, and Katherine Yelick. A Case for Intelligent RAM. IEEE Micro , 17(2):34–44, 1997. URL: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/40.592312 .[32] Shahin Roozkhosh, Denis Hoornaert, and Renato Man-cuso. CAESAR: Coherence-Aided Elective and Seam-less Alternative Routing via on-chip FPGA. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS) ,pages 356–369, 2022. URL: https://doi.org/10.1 109/RTSS55097.2022.00038 .[33] Shahin Roozkhosh, Denis Hoornaert, Ju Hyoung Mun, Tarikul Islam Papon, Ulrich Drepper, Renato Mancuso, and Manos Athanassoulis. Relational Memory: Native In-Memory Accesses on Rows and Columns. CoRR ,abs/2109.1, 2022. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2109.14349 .[34] Shahin Roozkhosh, Denis Hoornaert, Ju Hyoung Mun, Tarikul Islam Papon, Ahmed Sanaullah, Ulrich Drepper, Renato Mancuso, and Manos Athanassoulis. Relational Memory: Native In-Memory Accesses on Rows and Columns. In Proceedings of the International Confer-ence on Extending Database Technology (EDBT) , pages 66–79, 2023. URL: https://doi.org/10.48786/e dbt.2023.06 .[35] Shahin Roozkhosh and Renato Mancuso. The Potential of Programmable Logic in the Middle: Cache Bleach-ing. In Proceedings of the Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS) , pages 296–309, 2020. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/ RTAS48715.2020.00006 .13 [36] Vivek Seshadri, Donghyuk Lee, Thomas Mullins, Hasan Hassan, Amirali Boroumand, Jeremie S. Kim, Michael A. Kozuch, Onur Mutlu, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Todd C. Mowry. Ambit: in-memory accelerator for bulk bitwise operations using commodity DRAM technology. In Proceedings of the Annual IEEE/ACM In-ternational Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) ,pages 273–287, 2017. URL: https://doi.org/10.1 145/3123939.3124544 .[37] Gagandeep Singh, Lorenzo Chelini, Stefano Corda, Ah-san Javed Awan, Sander Stuijk, Roel Jordans, Henk Cor-poraal, and Albert-Jan Boonstra. Near-memory comput-ing: Past, present, and future. Microprocess. Microsyst. ,71(C), November 2019. doi:10.1016/j.micpro.201 9.102868 .[38] Cole Strickler, Ju Hyoung Mun, Connor Sullivan, Denis Hoornaert, Renato Mancuso, Manos Athanassoulis, and Heechul Yun. Micro-architectural Exploration of the Re-lational Memory Engine (RME) in RISC-V and FireSim. In Proceedings of Workshops at the International Con-ference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB Workshops) ,2025. URL: https://www.vldb.org/2025/Worksh ops/VLDB-Workshops-2025/ADMS/ADMS25-08.pdf .[39] Neriman Tokcan, Shakir Showkat Sofi, Van Tien Pham, Clémence Prévost, Sofiane Kharbech, Baptiste Magnier, Thanh Phuong Nguyen, Yassine Zniyed, and Lieven De Lathauwer. Tensor decompositions for signal process-ing: Theory, advances, and applications. Signal Process-ing , 238:110191, 2026. URL: https://www.scienc edirect.com/science/article/pii/S016516842 5003056 , doi:10.1016/j.sigpro.2025.110191 .[40] Prathap Kumar Valsan, Heechul Yun, and Farzad Farshchi. Taming non-blocking caches to improve isolation in multicore real-time systems. In 2016 IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Ap-plications Symposium (RTAS) , pages 1–12, 2016. doi: 10.1109/RTAS.2016.7461361 .[41] Wm A Wulf and Sally A McKee. Hitting the mem-ory wall: Implications of the obvious. ACM SIGARCH computer architecture news , 23(1):20–24, 1995. [42] Xilinx. ZCU 102 MPSoC TRM. https://docs.xilinx.com/r/en-US/ug1085-zynq-ultrascale-trm/Zynq-UltraScale-Device-Technical-Reference-Manual, September 2022. Accessed: 2022-11-08. [43] Doe Hyun Yoon, Min Kyu Jeong, Michael Sullivan, and Mattan Erez. The dynamic granularity memory sys-tem. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture , ISCA ’12, page 548–559, USA, 2012. IEEE Computer Society. [44] Yangjie Zhou, Mengtian Yang, Cong Guo, Jingwen Leng, Yun Liang, Quan Chen, Minyi Guo, and Yuhao Zhu. Characterizing and demystifying the implicit con-volution algorithm on commercial matrix-multiplication accelerators, 2021. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2110.03901 , arXiv:2110.03901 .14