Title: Verilog-Evolve: Feedback-Driven and Skill-Evolving Verilog Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26498v1

Published Time: Wed, 27 May 2026 00:34:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Verilog-Evolve: Feedback-Driven and Skill-Evolving Verilog Generation 

Zehua Pei 1, Hui-Ling Zhen 2, Yu Zhang 1, Sinno Jialin Pan 1, Mingxuan Yuan 2, Bei Yu 11The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) have improved Verilog generation from natural-language specifications, but most pipelines still treat generation as isolated sampling followed by functional checking. This is insufficient for practical RTL design, where useful Verilog must be correct, synthesizable, timing-conscious, and friendly to downstream hardware objectives. We present Verilog-Evolve , a feedback-driven framework for versioned Verilog refinement and cross-session skill evolution. For each task, Verilog-Evolve generates diverse minor candidates, evaluates them with executable feedback from functional simulation, Yosys synthesis, ABC timing proxy, and optional GEMM metrics, then promotes the best candidate into a major version under configurable scoring. To improve across tasks, the system maintains modular skill guidance, retrieves skills accord-ing to task and feedback context, and evolves candidate skills from logged histories through create/improve/skip decisions and verifier reports. Experiments on VerilogEval and mixed-precision GEMM tasks show that Verilog-Evolve improves final functional success and promotion stability while producing more downstream-friendly RTL under open-source synthesis, timing-proxy, and netlist-level GEMM objectives. Validation-gated skill evolution further improves GEMM downstream quality and achieves the best downstream score and GEMM held-out pass rate among the evaluated skill modes. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have shown strong potential for hard-ware description language (HDL) generation, including Verilog gen-eration from natural-language specifications [ 1– 3]. However, Ver-ilog is not ordinary software: it is an executable hardware blueprint whose usefulness depends not only on textual plausibility, but also on functional correctness, synthesizability, timing behavior, and down-stream hardware cost [ 4, 5]. As LLM-generated RTL moves closer to electronic design automation (EDA) workflows, a code snippet that merely resembles Verilog, or even passes a limited functional test, is insufficient for practical hardware design [6, 7]. Existing LLM-based Verilog generation methods largely optimize for one-shot correctness or pass@k on functional benchmarks [ 3, 8–14 ]. This setting hides three limitations. First, model-only generation and self-reflection provide weak evidence: an LLM may assert that a module satisfies a specification while the implementation still fails compilation or simulation. Second, functional correctness alone does not ensure downstream quality; two functionally equivalent Verilog implementations can differ substantially in synthesized cell count, wire complexity, timing proxy, and suitability for accelerator kernels. Third, most generation pipelines treat each attempt as an isolated sample, without a versioned mechanism to record tool outcomes, promote better candidates, or accumulate reusable repair knowledge across tasks. Recent work offers two complementary perspectives beyond iso-lated functional sampling. RTL optimization methods use LLM-guided rewriting, symbolic reasoning, long-context design context, and tool feedback to improve existing RTL designs under synthesis or timing objectives [ 15 –18 ]. SkillClaw, on the other hand, shows that agent skills can be evolved from cross-session traces through aggregation, create/improve/skip decisions, validation queues, and worker-side replay [ 19 ]. Together, these directions motivate a generation process that closes the loop with tools, versions candidate artifacts, and con-verts successful traces into reusable skills. We therefore formulate Verilog generation as a feedback-driven refinement problem rather than a single-pass translation problem. The key idea is to close the loop between LLM generation and executable feedback: each candi-date is evaluated by concrete tools, scored by configurable objectives, and either repaired or superseded by a better candidate. Unlike pure RTL optimization, Verilog-Evolve starts from a natural-language spec-ification and required module declaration rather than a fixed golden RTL. Unlike generic skill-evolution systems, its memory is grounded in HDL-specific evidence, including simulation outcomes, synthesis statistics, timing proxies, downstream GEMM metrics, and optional SEC/PPA reports. To realize this formulation, we introduce Verilog-Evolve , a feedback-driven framework that combines versioned search with skill guidance, illustrated in Figure 1. For each design task, Verilog-Evolve launches multiple minor candidates using generation strategies such as direct Verilog generation, C-bridged generation, and feedback-conditioned repair. When timing or synthesis feedback is available, each minor can further use path- or module-level hints to diversify candidate generation. Each candidate is evaluated by a pluggable evaluator pool: a functional evaluator based on iverilog /vvp , a Yosys synthesis evaluator, an ABC-based timing proxy, a downstream evaluator for mixed-precision GEMM-style objectives, and an optional DC/SEC-style EDA adapter for industrial PPA evaluation. The evaluator out-puts are converted into a multi-objective score, enabling the system to select the best minor candidate and promote it into the next major 

version when it improves the current baseline and passes the con-figured gate. This major/minor protocol lets Verilog-Evolve refine candidates across versions. Beyond task-level search, Verilog-Evolve maintains a persistent skill memory. Reusable guidance is stored as modular skill files and retrieved according to task descriptions, timing paths, diversity plans, and skill registry history. After a batch of runs, structured histories are ingested as sessions, aggregated by referenced skills, and converted into create , improve , or skip decisions. Candidate skills are checked by evidence-based verifiers and can either be published immediately or queued for external replay validation workers before entering the persistent skill registry. This design allows the system to improve both within a task, through feedback-driven candidate promotion, and across tasks, through validation-gated skill evolution. 

> arXiv:2605.26498v1 [cs.CL] 26 May 2026

Task Input 

Specification <latexit sha1_base64="evPSnb1RgAlrah9WUc3ZCpVAhM8=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4Kkkp6rHgxWML9gPaUDababt2swm7G6GE/gIvHhTx6k/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/nY3Nre2d3cJecf/g8Oi4dHLa1nGqGLZYLGLVDahGwSW2DDcCu4lCGgUCO8Hkbu53nlBpHssHM03Qj+hI8iFn1FipGQ5KZbfiLkDWiZeTMuRoDEpf/TBmaYTSMEG17nluYvyMKsOZwFmxn2pMKJvQEfYslTRC7WeLQ2fk0iohGcbKljRkof6eyGik9TQKbGdEzVivenPxP6+XmuGtn3GZpAYlWy4apoKYmMy/JiFXyIyYWkKZ4vZWwsZUUWZsNkUbgrf68jppVyvedaXWrJXr1TyOApzDBVyBBzdQh3toQAsYIDzDK7w5j86L8+58LFs3nHzmDP7A+fwBxgeM4Q==</latexit> 

d

Module Header <latexit sha1_base64="XM3PYSMs9/AezItPM2/TKzJ7wik=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4Kkkp6rHgxWML9gPaUDbbSbt2swm7G6GE/gIvHhTx6k/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/nY3Nre2d3cJecf/g8Oi4dHLa1nGqGLZYLGLVDahGwSW2DDcCu4lCGgUCO8Hkbu53nlBpHssHM03Qj+hI8pAzaqzUHA9KZbfiLkDWiZeTMuRoDEpf/WHM0gilYYJq3fPcxPgZVYYzgbNiP9WYUDahI+xZKmmE2s8Wh87IpVWGJIyVLWnIQv09kdFI62kU2M6ImrFe9ebif14vNeGtn3GZpAYlWy4KU0FMTOZfkyFXyIyYWkKZ4vZWwsZUUWZsNkUbgrf68jppVyvedaXWrJXr1TyOApzDBVyBBzdQh3toQAsYIDzDK7w5j86L8+58LFs3nHzmDP7A+fwBzBeM5Q==</latexit> 

h

Versioned Self-Evolving 

Generate 

Direct 

C-Bridge 

Repair 

+ timing/structural 

diversity plans 

Evaluate with Tools 

Functional (iverilog) 

Synthesis (Yosys) 

Timing (ABC) 

Downstream (GEMM) 

Optional EDA (DC/SEC) 

Score & 

Promote 

Multi-objective 

scoring 

Best minor 

new major version  

> <latexit sha1_base64="ccjEh9cMD1Y/FFU808Zlwmij21k=">AAAB8nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPBi8cK9gPSUDbbTbt0kw27E6WE/gwvHhTx6q/x5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvTKUw6LrfTmltfWNzq7xd2dnd2z+oHh61jco04y2mpNLdkBouRcJbKFDybqo5jUPJO+H4duZ3Hrk2QiUPOEl5ENNhIiLBKFrJ72kxHCHVWj31qzW37s5BVolXkBoUaParX72BYlnME2SSGuN7bopBTjUKJvm00ssMTykb0yH3LU1ozE2Qz0+ekjOrDEiktK0EyVz9PZHT2JhJHNrOmOLILHsz8T/PzzC6CXKRpBnyhC0WRZkkqMjsfzIQmjOUE0so08LeStiIasrQplSxIXjLL6+S9kXdu6pf3l/WGvUijjKcwCmcgwfX0IA7aEILGCh4hld4c9B5cd6dj0VrySlmjuEPnM8fv6WRgg==</latexit>

→ 

> <latexit sha1_base64="oB5vaxGJiCCvtNUzubiGLSXpHIA=">AAACBHicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqMtuBosgKiWRoi4LblxWsA9oQ5hMJ+3QyUyYmVRKyMKNv+LGhSJu/Qh3/o3TNgttPXDhcM693HtPEDOqtON8W4WV1bX1jeJmaWt7Z3fP3j9oKZFITJpYMCE7AVKEUU6ammpGOrEkKAoYaQejm6nfHhOpqOD3ehITL0IDTkOKkTaSb5dbfkrP3Az2GAk1klI8wLGRzkenmW9XnKozA1wmbk4qIEfDt796fYGTiHCNGVKq6zqx9lIkNcWMZKVeokiM8AgNSNdQjiKivHT2RAaPjdKHoZCmuIYz9fdEiiKlJlFgOiOkh2rRm4r/ed1Eh9deSnmcaMLxfFGYMKgFnCYC+1QSrNnEEIQlNbdCPEQSYW1yK5kQ3MWXl0nroupeVmt3tUq9msdRBGVwBE6AC65AHdyCBmgCDB7BM3gFb9aT9WK9Wx/z1oKVzxyCP7A+fwDX9ZeJ</latexit>

Vi+1 → vi,k →

Cross-Session Skill Evolution 

Run 

Histories 

Create 

Improve 

Skip 

Skill 

Registry 

(SKILL.md) 

Promoted RTL <latexit sha1_base64="fv09kgVFys3JITKLrlsQQWdlQzA=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSKIh5JIUY8FLx4r2g9oY9lsN+3SzSbsToQS+hO8eFDEq7/Im//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+Oyura+sbm4Wt4vbO7t5+6eCwaeJUM95gsYx1O6CGS6F4AwVK3k40p1EgeSsY3Uz91hPXRsTqAccJ9yM6UCIUjKKV7puP571S2a24M5Bl4uWkDDnqvdJXtx+zNOIKmaTGdDw3QT+jGgWTfFLspoYnlI3ogHcsVTTixs9mp07IqVX6JIy1LYVkpv6eyGhkzDgKbGdEcWgWvan4n9dJMbz2M6GSFLli80VhKgnGZPo36QvNGcqxJZRpYW8lbEg1ZWjTKdoQvMWXl0nzouJdVqp31XKtmsdRgGM4gTPw4ApqcAt1aACDATzDK7w50nlx3p2PeeuKk88cwR84nz/KbI1x</latexit> 

V →

Major Round <latexit sha1_base64="Yb9DQG/eq7rvvyEp6eMNWSO4AJI=">AAAB+nicdVDLSsNAFJ34rPWV6tLNYBEEISSxabMsuHFZwT6gDWUynbRDJ5kwM7GU2E9x40IRt36JO//G6UNQ0QMXDufcy733hCmjUtn2h7G2vrG5tV3YKe7u7R8cmqWjluSZwKSJOeOiEyJJGE1IU1HFSCcVBMUhI+1wfDX323dESMqTWzVNSRCjYUIjipHSUt8sUdgTdDhSSAg+gfTC6Ztl27J9r+q40LZcz3ZcX5NLv+rVPOhY9gJlsEKjb773BhxnMUkUZkjKrmOnKsiRUBQzMiv2MklShMdoSLqaJigmMsgXp8/gmVYGMOJCV6LgQv0+kaNYymkc6s4YqZH87c3Fv7xupiI/yGmSZookeLkoyhhUHM5zgAMqCFZsqgnCgupbIR4hgbDSaRV1CF+fwv9Jy7WcqlW5qZTrlVUcBXACTsE5cEAN1ME1aIAmwGACHsATeDbujUfjxXhdtq4Zq5lj8APG2yfJTZOt</latexit> 

i → i + 1 

Retrieved 

Skills Figure 1: Overview of Verilog-Evolve. Given a natural-language specification and module header, the framework performs task-level major/minor versioned search: multiple skill-conditioned minor RTL candidates are generated, evaluated by executable tool feedback, scored under configurable objectives, and promoted into the next major version. Cross-session his-tories are further distilled into verifier- and validation-gated skill updates, which are retrieved to guide future generation and repair. 

The main contributions of this paper are: 

• We formulate specification-to-RTL generation as a feedback-driven refinement problem, using a major/minor loop to evaluate, repair, and promote candidates. 

• We develop a pluggable evaluator and configurable scoring frame-work that supports functional simulation, Yosys synthesis metrics, ABC timing proxy, downstream-aware GEMM objectives, and optional industrial DC/SEC feedback. 

• We introduce timing-plan-guided candidate diversification and cross-session, validation-gated skill evolution for Verilog genera-tion. 

• Experimental results on VerilogEval and mixed-precision GEMM tasks show that Verilog-Evolve preserves functional correctness while improving synthesis, timing-proxy, and task-specific hard-ware metrics. 

2 Related Work 2.1 LLM-based Verilog Generation and Optimization 

Large language models have been increasingly explored for Ver-ilog and RTL generation [ 3, 20 , 21 ]. To address data scarcity, prior work constructs or augments RTL corpora from open-source de-signs [ 9, 10 , 22 , 23 ]. BetterV transfers general code knowledge to Verilog through discriminative guidance [ 3], while MG-Verilog and CodeV build high-quality instruction data by summarizing and trans-forming RTL designs [ 8, 24 ]. Recent reasoning-oriented work such as CodeV-R1 further improves generation through reinforcement learning [ 25 ]. VerilogEval and RTLLM provide functional-correctness benchmarks [ 11 , 26 ], later extended by VerilogEval-V2 [ 27 ]. Agentic methods further decompose generation and debugging: AutoVCoder uses systematic prompting [ 12 ]; VerilogCoder introduces planning and waveform-tracing tools [ 13 ]; and MAGE employs a multi-agent engine [ 28 ]. RTLFixer [ 29 ] and HDLDebugger [ 14 ] use compiler or simulator outputs to repair generated RTL, but primarily target syn-tactic validity or functional correctness. LLM-aided RTL optimization typically starts from an existing RTL design and uses rewriting, sym-bolic guidance, long-context analysis, and timing-driven feedback to improve it [15–18]. 

2.2 Self-Evolving Agents and Memory 

A growing line of work studies agents that improve future behavior from execution traces. General multi-agent frameworks such as Au-toGen, AutoAgents, and LAMBDA coordinate multiple LLM agents for complex tasks [ 30 – 32 ], while other paradigms use self-evaluation, reflection, or prompt evolution to adapt behavior over time [ 33 – 35 ]. SkillClaw provides a concrete skill-memory design: it aggregates cross-session trajectories, groups evidence by referenced skills, de-cides whether to create, improve, or skip a skill update, and optionally gates publication through replay validation workers [ 19 , 36 ]. Verilog-Evolve adapts this mechanism to RTL generation, grounding skill updates in HDL tool outcomes rather than conversational traces. In contrast to prior work, Verilog-Evolve combines several ideas into a unified specification-to-RTL framework. Unlike one-shot gen-erators, it organizes search as versioned major/minor refinement with self-evolving skills. Unlike tool-feedback systems that only repair syntax or functional errors, it scores and selects candidates under configurable objectives using a multi-fidelity evaluator stack that includes functional simulation, Yosys synthesis [ 37 ], ABC timing proxy [ 38 ], and downstream GEMM metrics. Unlike generic skill-evolution systems, its skill memory is grounded in HDL-specific evidence, and unlike existing RTL optimizers that start from golden designs, it begins from natural-language specifications. 

3 Method 

Verilog-Evolve treats Verilog generation as iterative candidate refine-ment driven by executable feedback. Given a task description d and a required module declaration h, the system repeatedly generates candidate implementations, evaluates them with executable tools, scores them under configurable objectives, promotes the best candi-dates, and evolves reusable skills from histories. This section covers skill retrieval, diverse minor attempts, the evaluator pipeline, scoring, promotion, and cross-session skill evolution. 

3.1 Skill Retrieval and Prompt Conditioning 

Verilog-Evolve uses a persistent skill memory to guide both genera-tion and repair. Each skill is stored as a lightweight skill file containing 

2Algorithm 1 Verilog-Evolve 

Input: task d, module header h, skills S, evaluators E

Output: best RTL V∗ and updated skills  

> 1:

Initialize baseline V0 and feedback context C0; 

> 2:

for 𝑖 = 0 to 𝑅 − 1 do  

> 3:

for 𝑘 = 1 to 𝐾 do  

> 4:

Sample strategy 𝑔 𝑖,𝑘 and diversity plan 𝑝 𝑖,𝑘 ; 

> 5:

Retrieve skills S𝑖,𝑘 ← Retrieve (S, d, C𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑖,𝑘 ); 

> 6:

Generate/repair v𝑖,𝑘 ← LLM (𝑔 𝑖,𝑘 , d, h, S𝑖,𝑘 , C𝑖 ); 

> 7:

Evaluate 𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ← { 𝐸 𝑗 (v𝑖,𝑘 )} 𝑚 𝑗 =1 and log trajectory;  

> 8:

if early-stop mode is enabled and Pass (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ) then  

> 9:

break minor loop;  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

A𝑖 ← { 𝑘 : Pass (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 )} ; 

> 13:

if A𝑖 ≠ ∅ then  

> 14:

𝑘 ∗ ← arg min 𝑘 ∈A𝑖 

 Score (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ), Tie (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ); 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

if A𝑖 ≠ ∅ and Improve (𝑖, 𝑘 ∗) and Gate (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ∗ , v𝑖,𝑘 ∗ ) then  

> 17:

V𝑖 +1 ← v𝑖,𝑘 ∗ ; update C𝑖 +1; 

> 18:

else  

> 19:

V𝑖 +1 ← V𝑖 ; carry forward C𝑖 +1 ← C𝑖 ; 

> 20:

end if  

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

Evolve skills from logged sessions via create/improve/skip and verifier gates;  

> 23:

Publish immediately or queue validated skills for replay workers; trigger conditions and reusable domain guidance. The current skill li-brary covers functional Verilog generation, simulator-feedback repair, synthesis-aware rewriting, timing-aware rewriting, RTL optimiza-tion patterns, and downstream co-design for quantized GEMM-style kernels. For each minor attempt, the system retrieves relevant skills according to three sources of context: the natural-language task, cur-rent timing or synthesis feedback, and the sampled diversity plan. The retriever also consults the skill registry, so skills with validated ver-sion histories receive a higher retrieval score. Each candidate record stores whether its prompt used static or retrieved skills, enabling later skill attribution. Formally, let S𝑖,𝑘 denote the retrieved skill subset for minor at-tempt 𝑘 in major round 𝑖 , and let p𝑖,𝑘 denote its diversity plan. The generation context is x𝑖,𝑘 = (d, h, S𝑖,𝑘 , p𝑖,𝑘 ). The generator produces a candidate Verilog implementation by conditioning on this context: 

v𝑖,𝑘 = LLM 𝑔𝑒𝑛 (d, h, S𝑖,𝑘 , p𝑖,𝑘 ). (1) When a previous candidate fails, the repair prompt additionally re-ceives structured tool feedback f:

v′ 

> 𝑖,𝑘

= LLM 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟 (d, h, v, f, S𝑖,𝑘 , p𝑖,𝑘 ). (2) Skill guidance does not replace tool evaluation; it provides reusable priors that help the model produce more synthesizable, timing-friendly, and downstream-aware RTL. 

3.2 Diverse Minor Attempts 

Verilog-Evolve organizes generation into major rounds and minor attempts. In each major round 𝑖 , the system launches 𝐾 minor candi-dates {v𝑖, 1, . . . , v𝑖,𝐾 } using two complementary diversity sources. 

Generation Strategy . The first source is the generation strategy. Di-rect generation asks the LLM to generate a complete Verilog module from the task description, module declaration, and retrieved skills. The C-bridge strategy first asks for a C-style functional reference, then uses it to guide Verilog generation. Feedback-conditioned repair starts from the current major candidate and applies structured feed-back from failed evaluators. For example, a functional mismatch may trigger reset, signedness, or bit-width repair hints; a synthesis failure may trigger simplification of unsupported constructs. 

Timing and Structural Diversity Plan . The second source is an optional timing- and structure-aware diversity plan. When timing paths or synthesis feedback are available, the system may use path-or module-level hints to diversify minor attempts. These hints can prioritize timing-critical regions, structurally complex modules, or random exploration targets, while the rewrite focus rotates among combinational, sequential, and mixed transformations. Thus, a minor attempt is characterized by 

v𝑖,𝑘 ∼ Strategy 𝑖,𝑘 × PathSelect 𝑖,𝑘 × Focus 𝑖,𝑘 . (3) 

3.3 Executable Evaluator Pipeline 

Each minor candidate is evaluated by a pluggable evaluator pool. Let 

E = {𝐸 1, . . . , 𝐸 𝑚 } be the enabled evaluator set. For a candidate v, each evaluator returns 

𝑟 𝑗 = 𝐸 𝑗 (v) = (pass 𝑗 , m𝑗 , f𝑗 ), (4) where pass 𝑗 is the evaluator status, m𝑗 is a metric dictionary, and f𝑗 

is textual feedback used for repair. For each candidate v𝑖,𝑘 , the full evaluator record is the collection of all enabled evaluator outputs: 

𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 = E(v𝑖,𝑘 ) = {𝑟 𝑖,𝑘,𝑗 }𝑚 𝑗 =1, 𝑟 𝑖,𝑘,𝑗 = 𝐸 𝑗 (v𝑖,𝑘 ). (5) Thus the 𝑟 𝑗 notation denotes a single evaluator output, while 𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 

denotes the complete candidate-level record consumed by scoring, repair, and promotion. The scalar score is computed only from pass 𝑖,𝑘,𝑗 

and metrics m𝑖,𝑘,𝑗 ; feedback f𝑖,𝑘,𝑗 is used to condition later repair prompts. 

Functional Evaluator . The functional evaluator uses iverilog 

and vvp through the VerilogEval harness to compile and simulate a candidate. It classifies outcomes into passed , mismatch , compile_error ,

syntax_error , timeout , or unknown_failure . For mismatch failures, it records the number of mismatched samples and total samples, and converts common failure patterns into repair hints. 

Yosys Synthesis Evaluator . The synthesis evaluator invokes Yosys to parse, elaborate, optimize, and report structural statistics [ 37 ]. It extracts metrics such as cell count, wire count, wire bits, and cell-type distribution. These metrics allow the search loop to prefer simpler and more synthesis-friendly RTL among functionally correct candidates. 

ABC Timing Proxy . The timing evaluator uses Yosys’ ABC mapping flow as a portable proxy for timing quality [ 38 ]. It reports logic-cell count, DFF count, and an ABC delay proxy. While this proxy is not a replacement for full static timing analysis, it provides a lightweight downstream signal for discouraging long or overly complex combi-national structures. 

Downstream Evaluator . For downstream-aware experiments, Verilog-Evolve supports task-specific evaluators. In our mixed-precision 

> 3

GEMM setting, the downstream evaluator checks whether gener-ated RTL is friendly to mixed-precision GEMM kernels. It reports features such as multiplier count, adder count, DFF count, mux count, preferred bit-width hits, pipeline-depth proxies, area-delay-product proxies, and an aggregate downstream score. 

Optional Industrial EDA Evaluator . When an industrial flow is available, Verilog-Evolve can invoke or parse a DC/SEC-style evalua-tor. This evaluator returns SEC status, WNS, TNS, area, power, and critical paths. SEC is treated as a hard correctness gate for promo-tion in this mode. The implementation also supports a parse-only mode, allowing the framework to consume pre-existing industrial EDA reports without requiring commercial tools on every machine. 

Held-Out Promotion Evaluator . For selected downstream tasks, visible tests are used for repair feedback while generated held-out tests are used only for major-version promotion. In the mixed-precision GEMM benchmark, the held-out evaluator generates randomized cases for supported tasks and rejects candidates that overfit the visi-ble testbench. 

3.4 Configurable Multi-Objective Scoring 

The evaluator outputs are merged by a configurable scoring function. For a candidate record 𝑟 , scoring returns both a scalar objective and a Boolean eligibility bit: 

EvalScore (𝑟 ) = (Score (𝑟 ), Pass (𝑟 )) . (6) Let R be the evaluator names marked as required by the score con-figuration. The Boolean pass flag is 

Pass (𝑟 ) =

Û 

> 𝐸 𝑗 ∈R

pass 𝑗 ∧

Û

> 𝑔 ∈Gℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑

𝑔 (𝑟 ), (7) where Gℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑 contains explicit hard gates such as SEC success. Re-quired evaluators and hard gates determine promotion eligibility, while optional evaluator failures contribute only soft penalties unless the configuration promotes them into R or Gℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑 . The functional evaluator is required in all reported runs and acts as the primary correctness gate: candidates that fail compilation, simulation, or time-out receive large penalties and are ineligible for promotion under the default configuration. For open-source evaluation, the score is computed as 

Score open (𝑟 ) = 𝑃 func (𝑟 ) + 𝑃 opt (𝑟 ) + 𝜆 𝑎 𝐴 (𝑟 ) + 𝜆 𝑤 𝑊 (𝑟 ) + 𝜆 𝑡 𝑇 (𝑟 ) + 𝜆 𝑑 𝐷 (𝑟 ),

(8) where 𝑃 func is the functional penalty, 𝑃 opt is the fixed penalty for failed optional evaluators, 𝐴 and 𝑊 denote normalized synthesis area and wiring proxies, 𝑇 denotes the ABC timing proxy, and 𝐷 denotes the downstream task score. The weights are selected by a score con-figuration, allowing correctness-only, PPA-aware, timing-aware, or downstream-aware runs. A mismatch receives a penalty proportional to its mismatch ratio, while compile errors, syntax errors, timeouts, and unknown failures receive fixed penalties. Optional evaluators can either contribute soft penalties or be marked as required by the score configuration; 𝑃 opt accumulates a fixed penalty for each enabled optional evaluator that fails. In implementation, the metric terms are obtained by merging metric dictionaries from the enabled evaluator records. The synthesis terms 𝐴 (𝑟 ) and 𝑊 (𝑟 ) are computed from Yosys metrics such as cell_count , wire_count , and wire_bits ;

𝑇 (𝑟 ) is computed from ABC metrics such as abc_delay_proxy ;and 𝐷 (𝑟 ) is computed from downstream-evaluator metrics such as 

downstream_score and GEMM structural proxies. The score con-figuration specifies which metric keys are weighted and normalized, so additional evaluator metrics can be included without changing the scoring interface. Yosys, ABC, and downstream evaluators can be configured either as soft objectives or as required evaluators. Verilog-Evolve also supports an industrial-style scoring mode aligned with RTL timing optimization: 

Score EDA (𝑟 ) = 0.5 · ΔWNS + 0.35 · ΔTNS + 0.15 · ΔArea + 𝑃 area + 𝑃 SEC , (9) where deltas are normalized against the baseline major version. If SEC fails, 𝑃 SEC makes the candidate ineligible for promotion. This mode separates open-source proxy evaluation from industrial PPA evaluation: ABC delay is used only as a lightweight proxy, while WNS/TNS/area and SEC are used when the EDA adapter is enabled. 

3.5 Versioned Candidate Promotion 

Verilog-Evolve promotes candidates through a major/minor version-ing protocol. During major round 𝑖 , the system evaluates 𝐾 minor candidates v𝑖, 1, . . . , v𝑖,𝐾 . Let A𝑖 be the eligible set: 

A𝑖 = {𝑘 | Pass (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 )} . (10) SEC is enforced through the hard-gate component of Pass (𝑟 ) when the industrial EDA mode is active. Candidates outside A𝑖 may still be useful for feedback and skill evidence, but they cannot become the next major version. Among eligible candidates, the system selects the lowest score using a deterministic tie-break rule: 

𝑘 ∗ = arg min  

> 𝑘 ∈A𝑖

 Score (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ), Tie (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ) . (11) The default Tie is the minor index, so exact score ties are resolved by the earlier generated candidate. If A𝑖 is empty, no candidate is pro-moted in that round. Otherwise, the selected candidate is considered an improvement iff its scalar score is strictly lower than the current major baseline score: 

Improve (𝑖, 𝑘 ∗) ≡ Score (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ∗ ) < Score (𝑟 major ,𝑖 ). (12) For the first major version, the improvement predicate is true for any eligible candidate. When a promotion-only gate such as held-out functional testing is enabled, it is applied to the selected minor before the major-version update. If no promotion-only gate is enabled, 

Gate (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ∗ , v𝑖,𝑘 ∗ ) defaults to true. The update rule is therefore 

V𝑖 +1 ←

(

v𝑖,𝑘 ∗ , A𝑖 ≠ ∅ ∧ Improve (𝑖, 𝑘 ∗) ∧ Gate (𝑟 𝑖,𝑘 ∗ , v𝑖,𝑘 ∗ )

V𝑖 , otherwise . (13) For PPA-aware and downstream-aware modes, the system evaluates the full minor set and compares candidates directly under the config-ured objective. In non-PPA runs, candidate generation can stop as soon as a functionally passing minor is found. Each minor attempt is recorded in a line-based history file, while each major round records the selected minor, score, promotion decision, and promoted artifact. The evaluator record of each promoted major version is retained as 

𝑟 major ,𝑖 for later improvement checks. 

3.6 Cross-Session Skill Evolution 

After a batch of runs, Verilog-Evolve ingests histories as sessions and drains them into a local evolver store. Each session is summarized with metadata such as referenced skills, SEC/functional pass count, 

> 4

average score, strategy, path-selection mode, and optimization focus. Sessions are then aggregated by referenced skill; a single session may contribute to multiple skill groups. For each group, the evolver first applies an evidence gate. Let 𝑛 pass be the number of records that pass the active correctness gate, 𝑛 promote be the number of records that provide promotion-gate or promoted-major evidence, and Δ𝑠 be the mean logged score-improvement signal. The verifier accepts a candidate skill only when 𝑛 pass ≥ 𝜏 pass ∧ ( 𝑛 promote ≥ 𝜏 promote ∨ Δ𝑠 <

0), with defaults 𝜏 pass = 2 and 𝜏 promote = 1. If the candidate has high equivalence risk, at least one promotion is required even when the average score improves. An accepted group updates an existing matching skill through improve_skill ; if no matching skill exists, it becomes create_skill . Groups that fail the evidence gate are assigned 

skip .

Immediate and Validated Publication . Verilog-Evolve supports two publication modes. In immediate mode, verifier-approved skills are written back to the corresponding skill file and registered with a stable skill identifier and version hash. In validated mode, the candi-date skill is placed into a validation queue with replay cases, current skill text, candidate skill text, and publication thresholds. External validation workers replay up to a bounded set of cases with both baseline and candidate skill guidance, evaluate the generated RTL, and append one validator result per worker. Each result contains an approval bit and a quality score in [0, 1], where a passing replay receives quality 1 and failing replays are mapped from their scalar evaluation score. In the default implementation, the current worker replays at most three cases per job and uses the functional evalu-ator for this replay check; the queue itself may store up to eight candidate replay cases for independent workers. The default queue requirements are 𝑁 results ≥ 2, 𝑁 approve ≥ 2 and 𝑞 cand ≥ 0.75 . A worker approves only if the candidate skill’s mean replay quality is no worse than the baseline skill and also exceeds the queue’s minimum score threshold. The publisher aggregates worker outputs by counting approvals and averaging reported candidate quality scores. If the required number of results has not arrived, the job remains pending. If enough results have arrived but either the approval count or mean score threshold is not met, the job is rejected. Only jobs satisfying all three thresholds are published and registered. In summary, Verilog-Evolve improves within a task through feedback-driven version promotion and across tasks through validation-gated skill evolution. 

4 Experiments 

This section evaluates whether Verilog-Evolve improves Verilog gen-eration without sacrificing correctness, and whether the additional tool- and skill-evolution components provide stable gains under a fixed maximum search budget. We organize the study around three questions: 

• RQ1: Functional stability. Does versioned repair and promo-tion preserve or improve functional correctness compared with direct generation, C-bridge generation, and repair-only baselines? 

• RQ2: Tool-guided selection. Do open-source synthesis and timing proxies help select more stable final candidates without relying on commercial EDA tools? 

• RQ3: Skill evolution. Does cross-session skill retrieval and validation-gated skill evolution further improve final correctness and promotion stability? 

4.1 Experimental Setting 

Benchmark and Model . We use VerilogEval-Machine and VerilogEval-Human [ 26 ] as the functional-correctness benchmark. Unless other-wise stated, all variants use BetterV-CodeQwen-7B as the base model. This choice focuses the evaluation on the algorithmic contribution of Verilog-Evolve rather than model scaling. 

Tools and Objectives . The main experiments use only open-source tools. The functional evaluator compiles and simulates candidates with iverilog. The synthesis evaluator uses Yosys to extract structural proxies such as cell count and wire bits. The timing evaluator uses Yosys’ ABC integration as a lightweight timing proxy. For down-stream GEMM experiments, the downstream evaluator measures task-specific structural features such as multiplier usage, DFF count, mux count, pipeline-depth proxy, and area-delay-product proxy. The optional DC/SEC adapter is not used in the main open-source results unless explicitly stated. 

Search Budget and Variants . All Verilog-Evolve variants use the same maximum search budget: 3 major rounds, 5 minor candidates per round, and the strategy pool direct,c_bridge,repair. We compare five variants. Direct LLM samples direct Verilog without tool feedback. 

C-Bridge first asks for a C-style reference and then generates Verilog. 

Repair-only uses iverilog feedback for local repair but does not use multi-tool versioned selection. Verilog-Evolve w/o Skill Evolu-tion uses versioned major/minor search and open-source tool feed-back, but disables cross-session skill evolution. Verilog-Evolve Full 

enables skill retrieval, skill evolution, verifier gates, and validation-aware skill publication. 

Metrics . For VerilogEval, we report final success on public functional tests, best functional score, promotion pass rate, compile pass rate, average number of promoted major versions, and skill validation accepted/rejected counts. Final success measures whether the final selected candidate passes the public VerilogEval tests. Promotion pass measures whether selected candidates satisfy the configured promotion criteria under the enabled evaluator stack. The functional score is lower when a candidate has fewer or less severe failures. 

4.2 Functional Correctness and Promotion Stability 

Table 1 reports the main functional-correctness result on VerilogEval. The results show consistent improvement from direct generation to the full Verilog-Evolve pipeline. C-bridge generation improves over direct generation, indicating that an intermediate software-like repre-sentation is helpful for clarifying datapath behavior. Repair-only fur-ther improves both final success and compile pass rate, showing that simulator feedback provides useful local correction signals. Adding versioned multi-tool selection improves final success from 81.2 to 83.6 on VerilogEval-Machine and from 67.1 to 70.4 on VerilogEval-Human. The full system achieves the best final success, the lowest func-tional score, and the highest promotion pass rate. Compared with the versioned system without skill evolution, it improves the final 

> 5

Table 1: Functional correctness and promotion stability on VerilogEval. All evaluated methods use the same maximum search budget: 3 major rounds and 5 minor candidates per round; Verilog-Evolve variants use the strategy pool direct,c_bridge,repair . “Final Success” reports whether the final selected candidate passes the public functional tests. “Promotion Pass” reports the fraction of selected candidates that satisfy the configured promotion gate. Lower functional score is better.                                                               

> Method Tool Feedback VerilogEval-Machine VerilogEval-Human Stability Avg. Promoted Skill Val. A/R Final Success ↑Best Func. Score ↓Final Success ↑Best Func. Score ↓Promotion Pass ↑Compile Pass ↑
> Direct LLM none 76.8 0.46 61.5 0.71 58.9 84.2 0.0 –C-Bridge none 79.4 0.41 64.7 0.64 61.8 86.5 0.0 –Repair-only iverilog 81.2 0.35 67.1 0.57 64.9 88.1 1.1 –Verilog-Evolve w/o Skill Evolution iverilog +yosys +abc 83.6 0.29 70.4 0.49 68.7 90.3 1.8 –Verilog-Evolve Full iverilog +yosys +abc +skills 85.3 0.23 72.8 0.41 71.6 91.9 2.2 18/6

Table 2: Open-source multi-objective evaluation on mixed-precision GEMM tasks. F, Y, A, and D denote functional simulation, Yosys synthesis proxy, ABC timing proxy, and downstream GEMM evaluator, respectively. Mul Cells, DFF Cells, and ADP Proxy are parsed from Yosys JSON netlists by the downstream evaluator. Lower cell count, multiplier usage, ABC delay proxy, ADP proxy, and downstream score are better.                                                     

> Variant Eval. Stack Func. Pass ↑GEMM Held-out Pass ↑Cell Count ↓Mul Cells ↓DFF Cells ABC Delay ↓ADP Proxy ↓Downstream Score ↓
> Correctness-only F91.7 83.3 182.4 4.7 18.3 6.81 512.6 4.92 PPA-aware F+Y 91.7 86.1 159.8 3.8 16.9 6.43 428.4 4.31 Timing-aware F+Y+A 88.9 86.1 164.2 3.9 19.6 5.72 401.7 4.08 Downstream-aware F+Y+A+D 91.7 88.9 151.6 2.4 21.8 5.48 332.5 3.21

success from 83.6 to 85.3 (VerilogEval-Machine) and from 70.4 to 72.8 (VerilogEval-Human). The promotion pass rate increases from 68.7 to 71.6, and the average number of promoted major versions rises to 2.2. Finally, the 18/6 accepted/rejected skill-validation ratio shows that skill updates are filtered by verifier and validation gates. These results support RQ1: feedback-driven versioned repair preserves and improves functional correctness compared with direct generation, C-bridge generation, and repair-only baselines. 

4.3 Downstream-Aware GEMM Evaluation 

Table 2 evaluates whether the open-source evaluator stack improves downstream hardware quality on the mixed-precision GEMM bench-mark. This experiment uses the three built-in GEMM-style tasks: int4_int8_mac_pe, mixed_precision_dot4, and requantize_int32_to_int8. We compare four evaluator configurations under the same maxi-mum search budget. Correctness-only uses only functional simula-tion. PPA-aware adds Yosys structural metrics. Timing-aware fur-ther adds ABC timing proxy. Downstream-aware adds the GEMM-specific downstream evaluator, which parses Yosys JSON netlists to expose multiplier cells, register cells, and an area-delay-product proxy. The reported metrics are averaged over the three GEMM tasks. The results show that functional correctness alone is insufficient to select GEMM-friendly RTL. Correctness-only generation reaches a high functional pass rate, but produces larger structures and worse downstream score. Adding Yosys and ABC reduces the cell count and delay proxy while improving downstream score. The downstream-aware variant achieves the best overall hardware quality: it matches the best functional pass rate, improves GEMM held-out promotion pass rate to 88.9, and obtains the lowest cell count, multiplier count, ABC delay proxy, ADP proxy, and downstream score. This supports RQ2: open-source tool feedback can guide Verilog-Evolve toward downstream-friendly RTL without relying on commercial DC/SEC flows. 

4.4 Effect of Skill Evolution 

Table 3 studies the contribution of skill retrieval, cross-session evolu-tion, and validation-gated publication. We compare four modes. No Table 3: Effect of skill evolution and validation. Human Success is the final functional success on VerilogEval-Human. GEMM Score and GEMM Held-out Pass are both measured only on the mixed-precision GEMM downstream tasks. GEMM Score is the average downstream score, and GEMM Held-out Pass is the randomized GEMM promotion-test pass rate. Skill A/R reports accepted/rejected skill updates.                        

> Skill Mode Human Success ↑GEMM Score ↓GEMM Held-out Pass ↑Skill A/R No skills 68.9 4.37 82.1 –Static skills 70.4 3.98 85.0 –Evolved, immediate 72.1 3.55 87.3 24/0 Evolved, validated 72.8 3.21 88.9 18/6

skills disables skill guidance entirely. Static skills uses the manually written skill files but does not update them. Evolved, immediate 

publishes verifier-approved skills directly after a run. Evolved, val-idated queues candidate skills for external replay workers before publishing them. Static skills improve over no-skill prompting, indicating that reusable RTL guidance helps both general VerilogEval generation and GEMM-oriented design. Evolving skills further improves Human success from 70.4 to 72.1, reduces GEMM downstream score from 3.98 to 3.55, and raises the GEMM held-out pass rate from 85.0 to 87.3. The validated mode publishes fewer updates, accepting 18 and rejecting 6, but achieves the best Human success, the lowest GEMM downstream score, and the highest GEMM held-out pass rate. Overall, replay-based validation filters skill updates before they enter the shared skill registry, supporting RQ3. 

5 Conclusion 

We presented Verilog-Evolve, a feedback-driven framework for ver-sioned Verilog refinement with cross-session skill evolution. Experi-ments on VerilogEval and mixed-precision GEMM tasks show that feedback-driven evaluation and validation-gated skill updates im-prove both functional correctness and downstream hardware quality. Future work will extend the evaluator stack with richer physical-design signals and integrate industrial EDA flows with formal equiv-alence checking. 

> 6

References 

[1] A. Fan, B. Gokkaya, M. Harman, M. Lyubarskiy, S. Sengupta, S. Yoo, and J. M. Zhang, “Large language models for software engineering: Survey and open problems,” in 

2023 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering: Future of Software Engineering (ICSE-FoSE) , 2023. [2] D. Nam, A. Macvean, V. Hellendoorn, B. Vasilescu, and B. Myers, “Using an llm to help with code understanding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering , 2024. [3] Z. Pei, H.-L. Zhen, M. Yuan, Y. Huang, and B. Yu, “Betterv: Controlled verilog generation with discriminative guidance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03375 , 2024. [4] M. Liu, T.-D. Ene, R. Kirby, C. Cheng, N. Pinckney, R. Liang, J. Alben, H. Anand, S. Banerjee, I. Bayraktaroglu et al. , “ChipNeMo: Domain-Adapted LLMs for Chip Design,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00176 , 2023. [5] Z. He, H. Wu, X. Zhang, X. Yao, S. Zheng, H. Zheng, and B. Yu, “ChatEDA: A large language model powered autonomous agent for EDA,” in ACM/IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning CAD (MLCAD) , 2023. [6] Y. Pu, Z. He, T. Qiu, H. Wu, and B. Yu, “Customized retrieval augmented generation and benchmarking for eda tool documentation qa,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15353 ,2024. [7] Y. Zhang, H.-L. Zhen, Z. Pei, Y. Lian, L. Yin, M. Yuan, and B. Yu, “Dila: Enhancing llm tool learning with differential logic layer,” pp. 1952–1963, 2026. [8] Y. Zhang, Z. Yu, Y. Fu, C. Wan et al. , “Mg-verilog: Multi-grained dataset towards enhanced llm-assisted verilog generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01910 , 2024. [9] S. Thakur, B. Ahmad, H. Pearce, B. Tan, B. Dolan-Gavitt, R. Karri, and S. Garg, “Verigen: A large language model for verilog code generation,” ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems , vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 1–31, 2024. [10] S. Liu, W. Fang, Y. Lu, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, and Z. Xie, “RTLCoder: Outperforming GPT-3.5 in Design RTL Generation with Our Open-Source Dataset and Lightweight Solution,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.08617 , 2023. [11] Y. Lu, S. Liu, Q. Zhang, and Z. Xie, “RTLLM: An open-source benchmark for design rtl generation with large language model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05345 , 2023. [12] M. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Lin, W. Ding, X. Hou, Y. Feng, C. Li, and M. Guo, “Autovcoder: A systematic framework for automated verilog code generation using llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18333 , 2024. [13] C.-T. Ho, H. Ren, and B. Khailany, “Verilogcoder: Autonomous verilog coding agents with graph-based planning and abstract syntax tree (ast)-based waveform tracing tool,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 39, no. 1, 2025. [14] X. Yao, H. Li, T. H. Chan, W. Xiao, M. Yuan, Y. Huang, L. Chen, and B. Yu, “Hdlde-bugger: Streamlining hdl debugging with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11671 , 2024. [15] X. Yao, Y. Wang, X. Li, Y. Lian, R. Chen, L. Chen, M. Yuan, H. Xu, and B. Yu, “Rtlrewriter: Methodologies for large models aided rtl code optimization,” in Pro-ceedings of the 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design ,2024. [16] Y. Wang, W. Ye, P. Guo, Y. He, Z. Wang, B. Tian, S. He, G. Sun, Z. Shen, S. Chen 

et al. , “Symrtlo: Enhancing rtl code optimization with llms and neuron-inspired symbolic reasoning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 38, pp. 50 093–50 118, 2026. [17] Y. Ye, C.-K. Shen, X. Hu, Y. Liu, S. Yin, X. Yao, B. Yu, and T.-Y. Ho, “Longrtl: Graph-similarity-guided llm-driven long context rtl optimization,” 2026. [18] W. Fang, Y. Lu, S. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Guo, J. He, F. Tu, and Z. Xie, “Dr. rtl: Autonomous agentic rtl optimization through tool-grounded self-improvement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.14989 , 2026. [19] Y. Ji et al. , “Skillclaw: Let skills evolve collectively with agentic evolver,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.08377 , 2026. [20] S. Thakur, B. Ahmad, Z. Fan, H. Pearce, B. Tan, R. Karri, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. Garg, “Benchmarking Large Language Models for Automated Verilog RTL Code Generation,” in IEEE/ACM Proceedings Design, Automation and Test in Eurpoe (DATE) ,2023. [21] K. Chang, Y. Wang, H. Ren, M. Wang, S. Liang, Y. Han, H. Li, and X. Li, “Chipgpt: How far are we from natural language hardware design,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14019 , 2023. [22] E. Dehaerne, B. Dey, S. Halder, and S. De Gendt, “A Deep Learning Framework for Verilog Autocompletion Towards Design and Verification Automation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13840 , 2023. [23] F. Cui, C. Yin, K. Zhou, Y. Xiao, G. Sun, Q. Xu, Q. Guo, D. Song, D. Lin, X. Zhang 

et al. , “Origen: Enhancing rtl code generation with code-to-code augmentation and self-reflection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16237 , 2024. [24] Y. Zhao, D. Huang, C. Li, P. Jin, Z. Nan, T. Ma, L. Qi, Y. Pan, Z. Zhang, R. Zhang 

et al. , “Codev: Empowering llms for verilog generation through multi-level sum-marization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10424 , 2024. [25] Y. Zhu, D. Huang, H. Lyu, X. Zhang, C. Li, W. Shi, Y. Wu, J. Mu, J. Wang, Y. Zhao et al. ,“Codev-r1: Reasoning-enhanced verilog generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.24183 ,2025. [26] M. Liu, N. Pinckney, B. Khailany, and H. Ren, “VerilogEval: Evaluating Large Lan-guage Models for Verilog Code Generation,” in IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD) , 2023. [27] N. Pinckney, C. Batten, M. Liu, H. Ren, and B. Khailany, “Revisiting verilogeval: Newer llms, in-context learning, and specification-to-rtl tasks,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11053 [28] Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, Z. Yu, and J. Zhao, “Mage: A multi-agent engine for automated rtl code generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07822 , 2024. [29] Y. Tsai, M. Liu, and H. Ren, “RTLFixer: Automatically Fixing RTL Syntax Errors with Large Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16543 , 2023. [30] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, E. Zhu, B. Li, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, and C. Wang, “Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversa-tion framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 , 2023. [31] G. Chen, S. Dong, Y. Shu, G. Zhang, J. Sesay, B. F. Karlsson, J. Fu, and Y. Shi, “Autoagents: A framework for automatic agent generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17288 , 2023. [32] M. Sun, R. Han, B. Jiang, H. Qi, D. Sun, Y. Yuan, and J. Huang, “Lambda: A large model based data agent,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17535 , 2024. [33] W. Gao, R. Liu, X. Wang, F. Guo, S. Yang, X. Chen, H.-L. Zhen, H. Chen, W. Lin, X. Li 

et al. , “Agentcollab: A self-evaluation-driven collaboration paradigm for efficient llm agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.26034 , 2026. [34] Z. Tang, Y. Cui, S. Kai, W. Zhao, K. Ye, X. Li, A. Tian, Z. Pei, H.-L. Zhen, S. Hu 

et al. , “Rethinker: Scientific reasoning by rethinking with guided reflection and confidence control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.04496 , 2026. [35] Z. Pei, H.-L. Zhen, S. Kai, S. J. Pan, Y. Wang, M. Yuan, and B. Yu, “Scope: Prompt evolution for enhancing agent effectiveness,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.15374 , 2025. [36] W. Lin, H.-L. Zhen, S. Yang, X. Wang, R. Liu, H. Chen, W. Zhang, C. Zhou, Y. Li, C. Chen et al. , “Towards efficient agents: A co-design of inference architecture and system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.18337 , 2025. [37] C. Wolf, “Yosys open synthesis suite,” https://yosyshq.net/yosys/. [38] R. Brayton and A. Mishchenko, “ABC: An academic industrial-strength verification tool,” in International Conference on Computer-Aided Verification (CAV) , 2010.