Title: VDCores: Resource Decoupled Programming and Execution for Asynchronous GPU

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03190v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 00:17:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# VDCores: Resource Decoupled Programming and Execution for Asynchronous GPUs 

## Zijian He 

zih015@ucsd .edu University of California, San Diego San Diego, California, USA 

## Adrian Sampson 

asampson@cs .cornell .edu Cornell University Ithaca, New York, USA 

## Yiying Zhang 

yiying@ucsd .edu University of California, San Diego and GenseeAI Inc. San Diego, California, USA 

## Zhiyuan Guo 

zhiyuang@cornell .edu Cornell University Ithaca, New York, USA 

## Abstract 

Modern GPUs increasingly rely on specialized and asynchro-nous hardware units to deliver high performance. Yet these units are often underutilized because today’s GPU software stacks still organize programming and execution around a monolithic kernel model that mismatches asynchronous hard-ware. To address this issue, Virtual Decoupled Engines (VD-Cores) presents a new decoupled programming and execution model for asynchronous GPUs. VDCores abstracts asynchro-nous hardware execution units as resource isolated virtual cores and represents workloads as dependency-connected micro-operations ( 𝜇 ops). this abstraction removes static or-chestration from the programmer, enables automatic overlap of memory and compute based on dependency and resource readiness, and thereby improves utilization of asynchronous hardware resources. Realizing such a decoupled abstraction efficiently on to-day’s GPUs is itself challenging, VDCores addresses this through a GPU-specialized programming model and GPU runtime design that preserves the flexibility while minimizing implementation overhead. Across four LLM inference work-loads on GH200, H100, and RTX 6000 Pro GPUs, VDCores significantly improves decoding throughput by 24% on aver-age and by up to 77% under dynamic inputs, while reducing kernel programming and specialization effort by 90%. We have open sourced VDCores at https://github .com/vdcores/ vdcores. 

## 1 Introduction 

Modern GPUs increasingly expose specialized and asynchro-nous internal resources, such as tensor cores and hardware-assisted asynchronous memory movement [ 30 , 32 ]. Architec-tures such as NVIDIA Hopper further strengthen this trend with mechanisms like the Tensor Memory Accelerator (TMA), allowing memory transfer and computation to proceed con-currently [ 27 ]. In principle, such hardware should improve utilization by reducing idle time and enabling overlap across different execution units. However, GPU programming and execution models have not evolved accordingly. Most existing systems still rely on a resource-coupled monolithic kernel model , originally de-signed for largely synchronous, data-parallel execution. They continue to use this model even as GPU hardware becomes increasingly asynchronous and task-parallel. This model fun-damentally misaligns with modern GPU hardware and creates two drawbacks. First, the monolithic kernel abstraction substantially in-creases the complexity of asynchronous GPU programming. GPU programmers must carefully orchestrate memory move-ment, tensor-core execution, synchronization, and pipelining to avoid bubbles [ 33 , 41 , 49 ]. Second, monolithic kernels pack dependency management and overlap decisions into a single opaque schedule and execution unit [ 7, 8]. This creates uti-lization bubbles and prevents opportunistic execution across kernel boundaries based on runtime resource availability. Dy-namic workloads further exacerbate this limitation, where changing inputs quickly invalidates compile-time overlap and resource-allocation decisions [22, 40]. Recent frameworks embrace new programming paradigms, libraries, or compilers to ease the programming and perfor-mance tuning for asynchronous GPUs. For example, CUT-LASS uses warp specialization to overlap memory and compute within a kernel, while Mirage Persistent Kernel (MPK) [ 16 ] and ThunderKittens (TK) [ 41 ] extend this idea with cross-task pipelining. However, these approaches only mitigate, rather than remove, the mismatch between mono-lithic kernels and asynchronous hardware. They improve over-lap inside kernels or across statically planned tasks, but still preserve the kernel/task as the main unit of composition. To better match asynchronous GPUs, we propose a di-rect but fundamental shift in GPU programming and exe-cution model: Expose each asynchronous hardware unit on GPUs as an isolated programming and execution unit. De-velopers therefore program asynchronous units directly and independently, rather than wiring them inside a single mono-lithic abstraction. At runtime, each hardware unit is driven        

> 1
> arXiv:2605.03190v1 [cs.DC] 4 May 2026 Zijian He, Adrian Sampson, Yiying Zhang, and Zhiyuan Guo GPU
> Compute Unit
> Virtual
> Memory Core
> Virtual
> Comptue Core
> kernels
> kernel
> uops ops
> uops
> VDCores Executor
> (§4.3)
> Monolith Kernel Model
> VDCores Decoupled Model
> (§ 4.1)
> CUDA
> Core
> Tensor Memory Accelerator
> (TMA)
> CUDA
> Core Tensor
> Core
> Streaming Multiprocessor (SM)
> Virtual
> Compute Core
> Async Compute
> Units
> Async Memory
> Units
> SM SM x 132
> H100 GPU
> Abstraction
> Generator
> (§ 4.2)

Figure 1. Comparing VDCores and monolith kernel programming and execution models. On an NVIDIA H100 GPU with asynchronous hardware units. VDCores 

Figure 2. VDCores Inference Perfor-mance and Programming Effort. Bot-tom left is better .by resource-isolated and opportunistic scheduling rather than static orchestration. Based on this idea, we build virtual decoupled cores (VD-Cores), the first system providing a decoupled programming interface and execution stack for asynchronous GPUs. VD-Cores realizes the decoupled model by virtualizing mem-ory and compute resources into software-managed execu-tion units: virtual memory cores (VMCs) and virtual com-pute cores (VCCs), each of which could execute indepen-dently. Given operators from high-level ML frameworks, 

e.g. PyTorch, VDCores lowers workloads into dependency-connected 𝜇 op streams, and maps them onto corresponding virtual units for execution. VDCores provides a unified solution to asynchronous hard-ware. First, it lets programmers express computation and data movement as fine-grained and resource-isolated 𝜇 ops, without manually and statically specifying overlap, orchestration, or synchronization strategies. Second, at runtime, the system can 

automatically overlap memory and compute operations based on actual dependency satisfaction and resource availability. Finally, once a library of fine-grained 𝜇 ops is built for this virtual architecture, future tasks can reuse and re-orchestrate 

them to realize different execution plans, without rebuilding specialized kernels for every workload variant. Despite its promise, major challenge lies in efficiently real-izing the decoupled model on existing GPUs. Modern GPUs still use a SIMT programming interface that favors regular, uniform control flow to expose asynchronous units. Mate-rializing a decoupled runtime on top of this substrate can resemble building a software microarchitectural emulator: it must explicitly track resource availability, manage fine-grained dependencies, and schedule work across asynchro-nous units in real time. Such logic is inherently branch-heavy, stateful, and synchronization-intensive, making it a poor fit for SIMT execution. Without careful design, these control and bookkeeping overheads can easily erase the flexibility and utilization gains of decoupling. VDCores addresses this performance challenge with the following key ideas: First, VDCores fully exploits the different forms of par-allelism available on GPUs to sustain high 𝜇 op throughput. Rather than interpreting 𝜇 ops through a purely scalar con-trol path, VDCores organizes each virtual core as a software pipeline with separate control and execution stages, and uses SIMT threads cooperatively within each path for instruction handling, address generation, allocation, and data movement. This design lets VDCores retain the flexibility of decoupled execution while still issuing and executing 𝜇 ops fast enough to fullfil the capacity of GPU computation and memory. Second, VDCores reduces the cost of dependency tracking through co-design of the programming model, 𝜇 op genera-tion, and execution. The key insight is to restrict and structure inter-𝜇 op dependencies so they can be encoded compactly and partially resolved without bookkeeping. This allows the 𝜇 op generator to simplify the dependency handling offline, avoid-ing much of the expensive cross-virtual-core synchronization at runtime. We implement VDCores on asynchronous GPUs with different architectures including NVIDIA GH200, H100, and RTX 6000 Pro GPUs. We evaluate it with four repre-sentative LLM inference workloads. As highlighted in Fig-ure 2, VDCores achieves 24% higher decoding through-put on average than state-of-the-art hand-optimized ker-nel and megakernel baselines, and improves performance further by up to 77% under dynamic inputs. At the same time, VDCores reduces kernel programming and special-ization effort by 90%. We have open sourced VDCores at https://github .com/vdcores/vdcores. 

## 2 Motivation 

2.1 Asynchronous GPU Programming and Performance 

Existing ML frameworks [ 35 ] lower high-level operators into a sequence of GPU kernels and launch them on the device.                  

> 2Kernel A Kernel B
> Bubbles
> C1 C2 C1 C2 C3
> ...
> M1 M2 M1 M2 M3
> C1 C2 C1 C2 C3
> Runtime Reorder
> M1 M2 M3 M2 M1
> uop
> Memory Unit
> (TMA)
> Compute Unit
> (CUDA/Tensor Core)
> Memory Unit
> (TMA)
> Compute Unit
> (CUDA/Tensor Core) Execution
> Time
> VDCores  Kernel
> uop dependency kernel launch hidden data dep

Figure 3. Asynchronous unit utilization under the kernel exe-cution model. VDCores overcomes this limitation with asynchronous and independent execution. Cross-task Bubble 

> Dynamic Fusion
> Auto-overlapping
> Mirage Persistent Kernel
> VDCores

Figure 4. Memory-bandwidth utilization comparison on a single Llama3-8B layer. MPK underutilize memory bandwidth due to inefficient inter-task overlapping. 

A kernel is the standard GPU programming and execution unit: a host-launched device function that executes the same program across many threads over different data elements. This abstraction is becoming increasingly strained as GPU hardware grows more heterogeneous and asynchronous. As shown in Figure 1, achieving high performance increasingly requires fully utilizing asynchronous units ( e.g. , Tensor Cores and TMAs) at the same time. This trend reflects a broader ar-chitectural shift in GPUs ( e.g. , Blackwell [ 29 ], AMD [ 2 ]) and accelerators ( e.g. TPU [ 24 ], Groq [ 19 ]) toward asynchronous execution. However, on asynchronous GPUs, the kernel abstraction creates substantial programming complexity. The difficulty appears along two fronts. First, programmers must manually coordinate heterogeneous warp roles inside SIMT code, e.g. ,using warp specialization to embed producer and consumer behaviors into conditional control flow and explicitly syn-chronizing their overlap. Second, performance depends on manually orchestrating deep software pipelines, e.g. , multi-buffering. Existing solutions reduce parts of this burden but do not eliminate the require of manual, static and monolith orchestration. Further, the monolith kernel abstraction packs asynchro-nous resources into a single opaque execution unit, itself limits the utilization of asynchronous units. A kernel bun-dles multiple resources and execution phases under a sin-gle start and finish, so the hardware cannot reuse partially idle resources across kernel boundaries for sub-operations, causing bubbles in execution. In Figure 3, between two adja-cent kernels mapped to the same hardware unit, one kernel may still be performance writing back while some of its re-sources, such as the compute engine, are already idle, and cannot be used by the next kernel. Existing solutions like programmable launch control and prologue/body/epilogue staging only mitigates this overhead. As in Figure 4, even MPK applies inter-task prologue-body overlapping, signifi-cant task-boundary-aligned drops in memory utilization are still visible during execution, indicating that much of the available hardware parallelism remains difficult to express and easy to leave underutilized. 

2.2 Kernel Specialization Efforts 

Modern ML execution is no longer a fixed sequence of uni-form operators over stable input shapes. e.g. , S-LoRA [ 36 ]shows that serving many adapters introduces dynamic weights, varying ranks, and heterogeneous batches, requiring both flexible memory management and specialized execution strategies. Monolithic kernels struggle to adapt to dynamic cases: a kernel optimized for one regime ( e.g. , low-latency decoding or single-adapter execution) often performs poorly in another (e.g. , long-context decoding, large heterogeneous batches, or mixed-adapter serving). As a result, efficient execution increasingly relies heavily on kernel specialization , including kernel fusion, and megakernel designs. However, much of this specialization on asynchronous GPUs changes only how resources are orchestrated, including fixed operator bundles, buffer pipeline adjusting, and nearby producer–consumer fusion. e.g. , the fusion support interfaces in Megatron-Core [ 37 ] (11 fusion modules) and vLLM [ 25 ](9 fusion passes) are dominated by epilogue/prologue-style fusion. This specialization is simple in logic, but creates a huge programming overhead with a monolithic kernel model, which creates a cross-product problem: even small orchestra-tion changes can cause large performance shifts and therefore require new kernel variants. 

> 3Zijian He, Adrian Sampson, Yiying Zhang, and Zhiyuan Guo GMEM
> VCC VMC
> SM
> VCC VMC
> VMC
> VCC
> msg queues (m2c, c2m)
> SM SM
> matvec.tile
> load.dep V
> store.smem
> rope.tile
> load.smem
> store O

Figure 5. VDCores Abstract machine model. 

Beyond the monolithic kernel abstraction. Taken together, these limitations call for a direct, resource-facing model for asynchronous GPUs. Rather than packaging resources, the model should expose them as independent work units that can be composed explicitly and scheduled opportunistically at runtime. 

## 3 VDCores Overview 

VDCores serves a role similar to CUDA in GPU program-ming: it provides a programming abstraction and execution model for asynchronous GPUs (§ 4.1). It is built around a new hardware execution-unit abstraction, decoupled cores ,including virtual memory cores (VMCs) and virtual compute cores (VCCs), and a new programming and execution unit, 

micro-operators ( 𝜇 ops) .VDCores serves as a drop-in replacement for the CUDA backend. For GPU applications, e.g. , performing matrix mul-tiplication in PyTorch, CUDA converts them into a list of kernel launches, while VDCores converts them into a 𝜇 op graph (§ 4.2), consisting of 𝜇 op streams for virtual cores, defining the detailed operations to execute, and connected by dependency edges , defining the execution order of the 

𝜇 ops, as illustrated in Figure 5. VDCores then submits the constructed 𝜇 ops to its on-GPU executors, virtual decoupled cores (§ 4.3), for execution. Within each virtual core, 𝜇 ops execute in a dependency-driven manner, following dataflow order [ 6 ] rather than instruction order. After completing one 

𝜇 op, the executor selects another ready 𝜇 op for execution and continues until the entire 𝜇 op graph finishes. 

Execution Example. We illustrate VDCores execution flow using an instruction flow of two ML operators: a matrix-vector multiplication ( 𝑂 = 𝑀 @𝑁 ), connected by a RoPE rotation (𝑅 = 𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑒 (𝑂,𝑇 )), as shown in Figure 6. The VDCores scheduler decomposes operators into a a list of dependency-connecting compute and memory 𝜇 ops. With 4 pair of VCCs and VMCs available, VDCores decomposition is to tile the matrix along the 𝑀 dimension and assign the work to each virtual core pair. Each virtual core’s 𝜇 op sequence is shown as 1 . On each virtual core, VDCores execute 𝜇 op based on dependency and resource readiness. We illustrate the process and it’s benefits with two execution examples. Tiled schedule (on 4 SMs)                  

> Auto Overalpping
> matvec.tile K load Mt
> load.dep V
> store Ot
> 1
> rope.tile M/4
> 2
> load.dep Ot
> store Rt
> DRAM
> VMC
> VCC 1
> 214356
> 2
> Ot
> VMC
> VCC 1
> 214356
> 2
> load T
> matvec.tile K load.mat Mt
> load.dep(V)
> store.smem S0 rope.tile M/4
> load.smem S0
> store Rt
> load T
> Tiled schedule bypass global memory
> Dynamic Fusion
> SRAM S0

Figure 6. VDCores Execution Example. First, VDCores virtual cores reorders the execution to fill execution idle gaps, i.e. , auto-overlapping between 𝜇 ops. In 1 , the load Mt 𝜇 op can be reordered and executed be-fore load.dep V because the former have no dependency, while load.dep V is could still be waiting on its dependent instructions to finish. On VDCores, any 𝜇 op with ready de-pendency be executed first, reducing the runtime stalls casued by static scheduling and coarse-grained dependencies. Further, VDCores 𝜇 op builder (§ 4.2) exploits this dy-namic execution model to generate 𝜇 op sequences with fewer dependency-caused stalls, enabling optimization across op-erator boundaries. One example is dynamic fusion , which promotes global-memory communication to shared memory for one-to-one dependency edges between memory 𝜇 ops on the same virtual memory core. As shown in schedule 2 ,the VDCores 𝜇 op optimizer detects this pattern and rewrites 

store and load into store.local and load.local .At runtime, the dependency is resolved through local queues with low overhead. In effect, this achieves operator fusion without requiring a manually written fused variant. 

## 4 VDCores Design 

In this section, we introduce the three major components ma-terialize the decoupled programming and execution model on GPUs: VDCores decoupled model, VDCores 𝜇 op generator and VDCores virtual cores. 

4.1 The VDCores Decoupled Model 

This section introduces the decoupled programming model VDCores adopt and how it shifts the programming and exe-cution paradigm on asynchronous GPUs. 

4.1.1 VDCores Abstraction of GPU Hardware. VD-Cores decomposes GPU hardware execution units (stream-ing processors, SMs, or compute units, CUs) into resource-specialized cores: Compute Cores and Memory Cores. Each core resembles a lightweight register machine; VDCores fur-ther specifies its architectural state ( e.g. , register file, local-memory management) and programming interface to access                                                      

> 41VDC_DEFINE_UOP(COP_MATVEC, h_matvec)
> 2__vdc_cop__ h_matvec(VdcInst &inst ,VdcCtx &ctx ){
> 3auto c=ctx .alloc_registers (NCREGS);
> 4// the number of tiles are encoded in size field
> 5for (int i = 0; i<inst .size; i++) {
> 6float *a =ctx .m2c .pop_wait ();
> 7float *b =ctx .m2c .pop_wait ();
> 8matvec_tile_accumulate(a, b, c);
> 9ctx .c2m .push (a, b);
> 10 }
> 11 float *c_shared =ctx .m2c .pop_wait ();
> 12 copy(c, c_shared);
> 13 ctx .m2c .push (c_shared);
> 14 }

Figure 7. Simplified new compute 𝜇 op matvec . Kernel pro-grammers use dependency queues m2c and c2m , to acquire and release memory resources with push /pop .

them. Each type of core executes a flow of specific micro-operations ( 𝜇 ops): Compute Cores execute compute 𝜇 ops, while Memory Cores execute memory 𝜇 ops. A 𝜇 op is the smallest unit of execution and programming unit in VDCores. Each 𝜇 op describes a unit of task within the capability of the execution unit when the resource is ready. Memory 𝜇 ops in VDCores include memory movement and management operations, e.g. , load and store . For exam-ple, the memory 𝜇 op, load.dep in Figure 5 loads a mem-ory block from addr in global memory to the local memory. Compute 𝜇 ops are computation atoms that can be completed within a single resource domain ( e.g. , a local tensor core) and encode tile-granular semantics. For example, the compute 

𝜇 op attn performs the fused attention score computation. Control 𝜇 ops implement control flow like conditions and branching. VDCores further provides control 𝜇 ops, includ-ing loop , continue_if , which can execute on all virtual cores. Together, these 𝜇 ops give each virtual core a small pro-grammable execution context, enabling it to express complex GPU computation patterns beyond a fixed instruction stream. 

4.1.2 VDCores Programming Model. Similar to program-ming kernels in CUDA, on VDCores, GPU programmer pro-grams 𝜇 ops to extend VDCores’s capabilities or support new machine learning operators, e.g. , a new attention operator such as LinearAttention or new memory operations for data movement over GPU-GPU interconnects. As shown in Figure 7, adding a new 𝜇 op involves two steps. First, the developer defines a new opcode and spec-ifies how the fields in the 𝜇 op instruction word should be interpreted. Second, the developer implements and registers a GPU device-side 𝜇 op handler that executes the 𝜇 op. It takes the instruction word and the virtual core context as input. Programmers uses the context to request the service of run-time, including resolving dependency, allocating resource and changing register states. As shown in Figure 7, it can use the m2c and c2m dependency queues to acquire mem-ory resources from memory cores and release them after use. Compared with writing monolithic kernels, adding a new 𝜇 op frees the programmer from manually orchestrating asynchro-nous coordination across hardware resources. VDCores pre-defines a list of compute, memory, and shared control 𝜇 ops that support common types of ML operations. 

4.1.3 VDCores Execution Model. VDCores implies dependency-driven execution model. Each 𝜇 op may depend on resources produced or owned by other virtual cores in order to complete its task. For example (Figure 7), a matvec 

𝜇 op requires shared-memory tiles containing the input matrix and vector tiles during execution. In VDCores, such rela-tionships are represented explicitly as dependencies edges between 𝜇 ops, marking a execute-after relationship. This execution model improves asynchronous hardware utilization in two ways. First, by removing ML-operator exe-cution boundaries and merging work into a single 𝜇 op graph, it prevents resources from being blocked behind unrelated work. Second, by resolving execution at runtime from actual resource readiness, it naturally adapts to dynamic execution conditions instead of relying on a fixed static schedule. However, VDCores’s dependency-driven execution model can be expensive to realize on GPUs, due to the major over-head of dependency tracking. Conventional dataflow and out-of-order architectures [ 4] rely on dependency scoreboards that track every issued operation, incurring substantial cy-cle and memory overhead on GPUs. VDCores addresses this challenge in two ways. First, it reduces the complex-ity of the dependency graph by restricting and simplifying the dependency model. Second, instead of relying on runtime, cross-core dependency resolution, VDCores uses co-design to encode dependency structure into 𝜇 ops ahead of time and to localize dependency resolution as much as possible, while preserving the same execution flexibility. 

Encoding dependency in 𝜇 op. VDCores restricts each mem-ory 𝜇 op to have at most one inter-memory-𝜇 op dependency, plus an optional dependency to computation 𝜇 op executing on the same SM. This simplification eliminates the need to repre-sent and resolve an arbitrary dependency graph in hardware. Instead, VDCores encodes dependency information directly into 𝜇 ops in a GPU-friendly form. Dependencies between 𝜇 ops in local memory core and compute cores are represented using flags on the memory 

𝜇 op side. For instance, when a memory 𝜇 op carries a send 

flag, it forwards its allocated memory region to a local com-pute core. Conversely, a recv flag indicates that the 𝜇 op consumes a region sent from a local compute core. Similarly, dependency between two 𝜇 ops are also encoded into a depId field, and its direction is determined by the 

send /recv flags. Thus, when generating 𝜇 ops, VDCores does not store explicit pointers to dependent 𝜇 ops, and instead tracks dependencies entirely through these encoded fields.     

> 5Zijian He, Adrian Sampson, Yiying Zhang, and Zhiyuan Guo gemm.m64n16 4
> load W
> load X
> store O
> gemm.m64n16 2
> gemm.m64n16 2
> load W
> load X
> reduce O
> Tiling = m64n16k128 Tiling = m128n16k64 + reduce

Figure 8. VDCores Composes 𝜇 ops to Dynamically Tiles Shapes. 

Virtual-flow-based dependency-driven 𝜇 op execution. To enables the runtime to quickly identify 𝜇 ops that are indepen-dent and can therefore execute in parallel, without performing general dependency checks at runtime. To support this, VDCores 𝜇 op generate (§ 4.2) assign each VDCores 𝜇 op a virtualFlowId that encodes coarse-grained dependency structure among 𝜇 ops. 𝜇 ops connected by direct dependency edges are assigned to the same virtual flow, while independent 𝜇 ops are placed in different virtual flows. At runtime, instructions within the same virtual flow execute in order, whereas instructions from different virtual flows may be reordered and overlapped when resources permit. 

4.2 VDCores 𝜇 op Generator 

VDCores 𝜇 op generator takes highlevel machine learning operator graph ( e.g. , PyTorch computation DAG) and con-vert them into 𝜇 op, assign them to virtual cores and build dependency between them. VDCores resolves this progres-sively across two tiers to balance scheduling effectiveness and scheduling overhead. First, it chooses how to decompose ML operators to jobs on multiple cores. With a global view of the cross-operator DAG, this level focuses on exposing task-level parallelism and balancing load across virtual cores. Then, it optimizes the generated per-core 𝜇 op flows. This level fo-cuses on memory-𝜇 op placement, fine-grained dependence resolution, and instruction execution efficiency within each virtual core. 

4.2.1 Adaptive Scheduling and Tiling. VDCores first schedules the DAG of logical operators to virtual cores, sim-ilar to existing GPU backends. The key difference is that VDCores schedules over the full DAG (instead of single DAG node) and adapts execution at runtime by composing 𝜇 ops di-rectly, rather than by selecting from precompiled specialized kernels. We refer to this flexibility as adaptive scheduling .Examples include partitioning a GEMM along the 𝑀 , 𝑁 , or 

𝐾 dimensions, or partitioning attention across token and head blocks. Different tilings results on different workload to be assigned on each computation unit, where VDCores could dy-namically build through composing 𝜇 ops instead of requiring a new kernel. Given this flexibility, VDCores chooses tilings by itera-tively eliminating dominant critical paths in the execution DAG. Each operator is associated with a set of valid decom-positions into 𝜇 ops, provided by the 𝜇 op builder, and each 

𝜇 op and dependency edge carries a cost model that estimates its execution cost on virtual cores. A critical path is consid-ered dominant if its cost exceeds the average per-core cost by more than a threshold. The scheduler then refines operators on these paths by changing their tilings until the expected ben-efit becomes marginal or no dominant critical path remains. This process drives globally optimized execution while also reducing direct dependency-resolution overhead. 

4.2.2 Dependency Graph Lowering. VDCores next em-beds inter-𝜇 op dependencies directly into the per-virtual-core 

𝜇 op bytecode. It first performs virtual flow assignment, de-composing the dependency graph on each virtual core into independent chains and assigning one virtual flow to each chain. This decomposition remains possible even with control flow loops and branches, because computation 𝜇 ops introduce no direct dependency between each other, and each memory 

𝜇 op has at most one incoming inter-memory dependence. As a result, independent 𝜇 ops can bypass stalled ones instead of being serialized behind them in a single producer pipeline. VDCores then checks for and eliminates deadlocks by elaborating resource allocation along 𝜇 op flow on each core, especially slot-based local memory allocation, and detecting potential over-allocation. When necessary, it reorders instruc-tions without violating dependence constraints. For example, it may move an independent store ahead of a later load to free resources earlier. This step is particularly important when one VMC serves multiple VCCs. Finally, once dependencies are embedded, VDCores re-moves redundant dependency checking. When two 𝜇 ops are placed on the same virtual flow, in-order execution already enforces their readiness order, so explicit barriers implied by transitive dependences can be eliminated. This reduces polling and control overhead while preserving correctness. 

4.2.3 Dynamic Data Placement and Fusion. Several opti-mizations of VDCores 𝜇 op generation requires multiple steps to work together, including dynamic data placement. dynamic data placement change the placement of memory 𝜇 ops be-tween neighboring 𝜇 ops with one-to-one dependency. For example, intermediate data can be promoted to shared mem-ory to enable fusion-like locality, or kept separate to expose more overlap opportunities. The scheduler is aware of this optimization and accounts for the reduced cost of one-to-one dependencies. This design differs from conventional kernel fusion. Be-cause VDCores already decouples memory movement and computation into separate 𝜇 ops, composing them requires neither code generation nor recompilation. The same compu-tation can therefore be realized either as a locality-oriented fused pipeline or as a more weakly coupled flow that exposes additional overlap opportunities. 

> 6CFU
> thread ×32
> LDU1
> thread ×32
> STU
> thread ×32 LDU2
> thread ×32
> C2M
> M2C
> SMEM
> Alloc
> Gen. Address
> dep. resolve
> readiness
> reclaim
> writeback
> Virtual
> Compute Core
> thread ×128
> Virtual Memory Core
> CFU
> EXEC
> dep.resolve

Figure 9. VDCores virtual executor. The example shows executors on a single H100 SM, with two VCC and single VMC. 

4.3 VDCores GPU Executor 

Virtual cores are software 𝜇 op interpreter built on top of GPU hardware execution units. Each virtual core is launched once as a persistent kernel at the beginning of execution. VDCores runtime streams new 𝜇 ops to virtual cores for execution when new requests arrive. A core design challenge of virtual cores is how to preserve the flexibility of VDCores decoupled model without introduc-ing excessive runtime overhead . VDCores addresses this chal-lenge by drawing inspiration from classical microarchitecture while restructuring the design to match GPU hardware. At a high level, it forms a software analogous to a pipelined su-perscalar microarchitecture: multiple virtual execution units are organized as a wide pipeline, with each unit mapped onto GPU warps and register state, while explicitly leveraging SIMT parallelism within them. 

4.3.1 Virtual Memory Core. Virtual memory cores (VMCs) execute memory and control 𝜇 ops and manage their internal state ( e.g. , loop counters) and memory resources ( e.g. ,shared-memory capacity within an SM). VMC 𝜇 op execution throughput is critical to VDCores performance. For example, an NVIDIA H200 GPU has up to 4TB/s DRAM bandwidth. The VDCores runtime must sustain over 10K tile-level load/-store 𝜇 op/s to avoid becoming the performance bottleneck. VMC employs two levels of parallelism. The first comes from building an 2-stage execution pipeline for each 𝜇 op. Each 𝜇 op is first processed by a front-end control-flow unit (CFU), which manages register state, handles control 𝜇 ops, and performs address generation. The decoded 𝜇 op and gen-erated address is then issued to multiple parallel load units (LDUs) and store units (STUs), where dependency resolu-tion and memory movement are handled independently. This pipelined design reduces the initiation interval for processing a 𝜇 op: throughput is determined by the slowest pipeline stage rather than the sum of all stages, and instruction sequences no longer suffer from head-of-line blocking. Compared with placing all work in a single GPU loop, this design improves effective 𝜇 op throughput by 4.2×.Within each pipeline stage, VMC further parallelize con-trol and data movement by leveraging parallel GPU threads. In the CFU, thread-level parallelism and software pipelining allow 𝜇 op decode and address generation to proceed concur-rently with instruction fetch and register access. Managing local memory is likewise parallelized through a SIMT alloca-tor. Each 𝜇 op may request an arbitrary number of contiguous slots, and allocated slots may be freed in an order differ-ent from allocation ( e.g. , when implementing FlashAttention 

𝜇 op). VMC tracks memory availability as a 32-bit bitmask in shared memory and uses multiple threads to search candidate allocation positions in parallel. Each allocator thread probes for a slot starting from its thread ID, and the warp then uses a warp-level voting primitive to identify the first available location. 

Parallel virtual flow execution : by dynamically mapping virtual flows onto physical execution units. At runtime, the CFU maintains a mapping from each virtual flow to a phys-ical execution unit. For a given 𝜇 op, the CFU dispatches it according to this mapping. 𝜇 ops within the same flow are always assigned to the same execution unit and execute in order, preserving intra-flow ordering. When the number of active virtual flows exceeds the number of physical units, the CFU multiplexes multiple flows onto the same unit. This design preserves dependency semantics independent of the underlying runtime implementation. Non-dependent operations can execute in parallel across multiple LDUs and STUs. However, within each individual LDU or STU, 𝜇 ops execute strictly in order, following the sequence of dependency resolution, operation execution, and dependency message delivery. As a result, a 𝜇 op may spin-wait on an unresolved dependency and temporarily block later 

𝜇 ops assigned to the same unit. For example, within an LDU, one 𝜇 op may wait on a pending dependency and thereby stall subsequent 𝜇 ops in that unit. This design preserves order-ing and dependencies without creating a single hot spot of dependency tracking in VMCs. 

4.3.2 Virtual Compute Core. Virtual compute cores han-dle compute resources, including register files, SIMT cores and asynchronous matrix-computation units ( e.g. , Tensor Cores). Each VCC contains a control-flow unit (CFU) and multiple execution units (EU) for executing computation 𝜇 ops. As an example, in Figure 9, VDCores by default create two EU per SM, each handling 128 SIMT threads and attached CUDA core resources, when applicable. Unlike VMC, the CFU and EU in VCC are not mapped to separate parallel threads. Instead, they are organized as a software pipeline. The CFU state is stored in EU-shared memory, and for each instruction, the CFU runs first on EU’s thread set, maintaining and preparing state ( e.g. , updating the GPR value), in a manner similar to an operating-system 

> 7Zijian He, Adrian Sampson, Yiying Zhang, and Zhiyuan Guo

kernel, before yielding to the EU to execute the target 𝜇 op. This design is motivated by the low density of control 𝜇 ops in VCC execution: more than 98.6% of execution time is spent in the EU performing actual 𝜇 op execution. 

4.3.3 Dependency Resolving. On VDCores, dependency are resolved at runtime by passing dependency messages through first-in first-out (FIFO) messages queues connecting virtual cores. Following VDCores execution model, VCCs only communicate with VMCs on the same execution unit, while all VMCs can talk to each other. VMC-to-VCC messages include shared memory regions that have been loaded from global memory and thus can be used by the compute units. VCC-to-VMC message queues return used or generated memory regions to be recycled or written back. Similarly, VMCs communicate through a global queue allocated based on its depid . Between VMCs, mes-sages passes the ownership of global memory resources ( e.g. ,after writing to a global memory block). 

4.3.4 Avoiding Deadlock. Dependency-driven execution introduces a risk of deadlock when outstanding 𝜇 ops across virtual cores form a cyclic wait relationship on shared re-sources. A typical case arises between a VMC and a VCC: the compute side waits for inputs to be loaded into shared memory before producing outputs, while the memory side waits for memory slots to be released before issuing additional 

load 𝜇 ops. Since VDCores forbids cyclic 𝜇 op dependencies, deadlocks can only arise from resource-allocation cycles rather than dependency cycles. VDCores prevents such deadlocks by linearizing resource acquisition through a joint scheduling and runtime protocol, summarized as in-order allocation and out-of-order execution . The VDCores 𝜇 op generator (§ 4.2) first constructs a baseline 𝜇 op order that is deadlock-free under in-order execution. The runtime then preserves this order during local resource allocation ( e.g. , shared-memory slots), while still allowing later execution steps to proceed out of order once their dependencies are satisfied ( e.g. , loading a memory slot and sending notification). This avoids deadlock because resource allocation remains acyclic in the preserved baseline order, and once allocated, blocked 𝜇 ops wait only on acyclic dependencies, so some ready 𝜇 op can always execute and eventually release resources. 

## 5 Implementation 

We implement VDCores’s executors and 𝜇 op generator for NVIDIA Hopper and Blackwell GPUs in 5K lines of C++/CUDA. On top of this runtime, VDCores provides both low-level 𝜇 op execution APIs and high-level ML-operator execution interfaces in 4K Python LoC, enabling integration with PyTorch as a backend. We highlight the following implementation details further help VDCores to improve execution efficiency:             

> GPU #SMs ShMem KB/SM DRAM BW
> H100 132 228 KB 3.35 TB/s GH200 132 228 KB 4.00 TB/s RTX6000 Pro 188 100 KB 960 GB/s

Table 1. Hardware configuration used in end-to-end evalua-tion. On each system VDCores deploys 1 VMC and 2 VCCs per SM, with 8KB memory slot size. 

Portable Runtime. We port the runtime on three different NVIDIA GPUs with different microarchecture specifications, showing the portability of VDCores. As summarized in Ta-ble 1, each of them has different number of SMs, shared memory size, and global memory bandwidth. They also fea-ture different asynchronous execution unit configurations. e.g. ,GH200 and H100 additionally support asynchronous tensor core execution with WGMMA instructions. These difference is hidden by the VDCores virtual core and 𝜇 op abstraction. same 𝜇 op graph executes on both archi-tectures, while matvec 𝜇 op are backed by different imple-mentations. 

Message Passing on Virtual Cores. Both dependency queues and inter-execution unit communication in VDCores are im-plemented through message passing. We realize this mech-anism using 𝑚𝑏𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑟 instructions [ 31 ], which provide effi-cient synchronization while enabling space-sharing of hard-ware resources. Inside each SM, all execution units, includ-ing VMC and VCCs, share the same four physical execu-tion slots. If an execution unit blocks on a message ( e.g. , at 

pop_wait() ), it is de-scheduled and resumed only when the awaited message arrives. As a result, VDCores avoids spin waiting and reduces wasted cycles from idle execution units. 

Dynamic address generation VDCores supports dynamic ad-dress generation for every 𝜇 op to produce runtime-dependent addresses. In VDCores, an instruction may be marked with a dynamic flag, indicating that its address field (which may encode an address, an 𝑛 -dimensional tensor coordinate, or the index of a TMA descriptor) is generated dynamically and needs to be computed by adding an offset from an ac-cumulator register. Further, the accumulators are designed to be updated by control 𝜇 ops, e.g. , by repeat based on loop counter. This mechanism substantially reduces the num-ber of instructions needed for recurring patterns, which are common in LLM inference workloads, e.g. , full inference of 

llama-8b is encoded in only 224 𝜇 ops per virtual core. 

## 6 Evaluation 

We answer three key questions in this section: 1. Does VDCores improve end-to-end model execution over state-of-the-art kernel and megakernel systems? (§ 6.1) 2. How much does each key optimization in VDCores con-tribute to the performance gain? (§ 6.2)                                                         

> 80.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> H100
> 1.33x 1.37x 1.41x 1.53x
> Qwen3-1.7B
> 1.28x 1.31x 1.34x 1.47x
> Qwen3-8B
> 1.04x 1.46x 1.54x 1.68x
> Llama3.2-1B
> 1.27x 1.32x 1.43x 1.47x
> Llama3.1-8B
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> GH200  1.38x 1.38x 1.35x 1.55x 1.11x 1.13x 1.11x 1.30x 1.01x 1.46x 1.44x 1.61x 1.16x 1.18x 1.24x 1.27x
> 1248
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> RTX6000 Pro  1.37x 1.48x 1.49x 1.59x
> 1248
> 1.18x 1.11x 1.11x 1.16x
> 1248
> 1.34x 1.38x 1.39x 1.39x
> 1248
> 1.18x 1.10x 1.10x 1.16x
> Batch Size
> Normalized Throughput
> VDCores Mirage Torch + TK TK-llama1B vLLM SGLang

Figure 10. End-to-end decoding performance over LLM inference. Throughput is normalized to VDCores. The number on each group shows VDCores’s performance gain over the best baseline system. TK: ThunderKittens. 

3. Is software-managed decoupled execution practical given the runtime overhead introduced by VDCores? (§ 6.3) 

6.1 End-to-End Performance and Coding Effort 

We first evaluate VDCores on end-to-end LLM infer-ence under offline decoding. We study four representa-tive models—Qwen3-1.7B, Qwen3-8B, Llama3.2-1B, and Llama3.1-8B. Our setup includes KV cache and paged atten-tion. Without continuous batching, we experiment with offline decoding of a fixed batch for 64 steps from a 128-token con-text. We report token-generation throughput for batch sizes 1 to 8. We compare against strong baselines spanning the main current design points: vLLM [ 25 ] and SGLang [ 50 ] represent optimized kernel-per-operator execution with JIT generation and CUDA Graphs, while Mirage [ 48 ] and ThunderKittens-llama1B [ 42 ] implementations represent expert-tuned megak-ernels. We also include Torch+ThunderKittens as a lower-engineering baseline using PyTorch’s execution stack plugged with an optimized attention kernel. Figure 10 shows the end-to-end throughput results. Across all 48 evaluated combinations of model, hardware, and batch size, VDCores consistently achieves the lowest per-token decoding latency among both kernel-per-operator and megak-ernel baselines. Relative to the best baseline in each setting, VDCores delivers a 1.31x geometric-mean speedup, corre-sponding to a 23% average reduction in per-token latency, and up to a 1.68x performance improvement. The gains are especially pronounced on smaller models, where shorter task durations amplify the cost of underutiliza-tion across kernel boundaries. MPK reduces kernel launch overhead through persistent-style execution, but its pipeline structure is still packed into each individual task and thus exposes only limited overlap opportunities. ThunderKittens-Llama1B removes most stalls through manually designed fusion and prefetching specialized for this model architec-ture and batch-size-one regime, reaching roughly 96% of VDCores’s performance. The remaining gap is consistent with our argument that compile-time task-coupled schedul-ing, even when highly optimized, still leaves some overlap opportunities uncovered. 

Programming effort. Beyond performance, VDCores sub-stantially reduces the need for manual specialization. As shown in Table 2, VDCores implements the evaluated Llama3-1B pipeline with only 6 reusable 𝜇 ops and 741 lines of GPU code, while requiring no task-specific fused implementation. In contrast, Mirage and TK-Megakernel rely on 8 and 7 independent operators, respectively, together with 3 and 5 fused tasks, and require roughly 3x more GPU code. This gap reflects a fundamental difference in where optimization complexity lives. Kernel-centric systems realize performance through task-specific fusion and specialized implementations, so both code size and maintenance cost grow as operators, surrounding stages, or target hardware change. By contrast, VDCores reuses the same small set of 𝜇 op building blocks and changes only their composition and scheduling, shifting optimization effort from per-task kernel variants to a reusable runtime substrate. 

6.2 Performance Deep Dive 

To understand where VDCores’s benefits come from, we evaluate each key mechanism with targeted case studies to examine when each is effective. 

6.2.1 Auto Overlapping. VDCores derives intra- and inter-task overlap directly from dependency-driven execution of 

𝜇 ops. To isolate the benefit of this mechanism, we start from 

9Zijian He, Adrian Sampson, Yiying Zhang, and Zhiyuan Guo 

System # Independent LoC # Fused Fused LoC Avg. H100 Perf. Reusability kernels/tasks/ 𝜇 ops tasks (norm.) (for new model and hardware) VDCores 6 741 0 – 1.00 High 

Mirage 8 2,339 3 1,073 0.83 Low (Monolith Tasks) TK-llama1b 7 2,065 5 596 0.95 Low (BS=1, Special Fusion) vLLM 14 6,424 8 3,788 0.63 High 

Table 2. GPU Program Line of Code Comparison across Systems for implementing llama3-1b , along with qualitative reusability under new inputs and new architectures. Llama3-8B Qwen3-8B Llama3-1B       

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Normalized Performance
> 0.79x 0.77x
> 0.62x
> 0.86x 0.90x
> 0.71x 0.72x 0.71x
> 0.32x
> 0.92x 0.91x
> 0.73x
> 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x
> vLLM
> Mirage
> VDCs (no-overlap)
> VDCs (no-virtual-flow)
> VDCs (full-overlap)

Figure 11. Auto overlapping deep dive. VDCs : Virtual De-coupled Cores. MLP Layer QKV-Proj+RoPE Embedding+RMS     

> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> Execution Time (us)
> 44.23
> 36.94
> 43.83
> 33.53
> 10.56 8.73 6.80 5.30
> 17.47
> 4.30 3.10
> TK (no-fuse)
> TK
> Mirage (no-fuse)
> Mirage
> VDCs (no-fuse)
> VDCs

Figure 12. VDCores Dynamic Fusion Compared to Manual Fused Kernels. a restricted version of VDCores that converts 𝜇 op data de-pendencies into task issue barriers, forcing all instructions from a later task to wait even when their dependencies are already satisfied. This resembles a kernel-per-operator exe-cution style. We then enable cross-task overlap by restoring fine-grained dependency-driven instruction issue. Finally, we enable virtual-flow assignment, which moderates head-of-line blocking by allowing ready 𝜇 ops to bypass stalled ones. As Figure 11 shows, enabling cross-task overlap accounts for the dominant share of VDCores’s benefit across all work-loads. Without it, VDCores becomes comparable to, and in some cases slower than, baseline systems, showing that VD-Cores’s advantage does not come from faster individual op-erators but from the overlap exposed by dependency-driven scheduling. Enabling virtual-flow assignment yields a further 5% improvement on top. 0.5K 0.5K-B 64K RAND 

Context-Length / Skew Setting 

0.00 

0.25 

0.50 

0.75 

1.00   

> Normalized Performance  VDCores TK Mirage

Figure 13. Dynamic uneven-context evaluation (H100). x-axis labels: 0.5K = 1×512 , 0.5K-B = 64 ×512 , 64K = 1×65536 , and RAND 

= 64 ×random[256,1024] .

6.2.2 Dynamic Fusion. Dynamic fusion in VDCores is re-alized by rewriting the memory path of intermediate data between neighboring tasks, rather than by introducing a new fused task implementation. We evaluate this mechanism on two representative manually fused patterns, QKV-Projection + RoPE and the MLP block. As Figure 12 shows, VDCores closely matches the performance benefit of manual fusion in both cases, demonstrating that composing 𝜇 ops differently can exploit similar locality benefits without the need for spe-cialized kernels. We further study Embedding + RMS, a fusion opportunity that emerges automatically from VDCores’s runtime place-ment decisions but is typically left unfused in expert-tuned systems. In this case, fusion reduces execution time from 4.30 to 3.10μs, a 28% improvement over its own non-fused path 

6.2.3 Adaptive Scheduling. VDCores adapts to changing workloads by recomposing 𝜇 op flows and remapping work at runtime, rather than by building specialized task implementa-tions. We study the effectiveness of this mechanism with two case studies: dynamic attention length and dynamic LoRA serving. 

Dynamic Attention Length. We evaluate dynamic atten-tion under four H100 workload regimes that vary both se-quence length and batch structure, spanning short-context, long-context, and mixed-context cases (Figure 13). Mirage 

10 1 2 4 8 16          

> Distinct LoRA requests per batch
> 0
> 1000
> 2000
> Execution time (ms)
> 3.47x 3.03x 3.32x
> 3.00x
> 2.44x
> VDCores sLoRA (a) Uneven-context performance
> System Sched. Time (ms) Mirage 27000 TK ( attn )2.28 vLLM 352 SGLang 261 VDCores 1.4
> (b) Scheduling time

Figure 14. Adaptive Scheduling with dynamic LoRA serving. In-batch LoRA-adapter distribution follows. Copy   

> GEMV
> GEMM-S
> GEMM-L
> RMS
> Attn-S
> Attn-L
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> Performance normalized
> VDCores VDCores (manual) PyTorch

Figure 15. Single-operator performance of VDCores com-pared with VDCores (manual), a manually tuned warp-specialization implementation, and with PyTorch. employs a fixed kernel template across these cases, and VD-Cores outperforms it by a large margin in all regimes, with up to 6.18× lower latency. ThunderKittens adopts a host-side schedule and processor assignment from the input workload, but this adaptation is still built around a fixed specialized ker-nel. VDCores consistently outperforms it by 15% on average. The gap is especially pronounced in the short-context regime, where the overheads imposed by that fixed kernel structure are harder to amortize. 

Dynamic LoRA serving. LoRA [ 23 ] specializes a shared base model with lightweight per-domain adapter weights. In serving, a single batch may mix requests that share the same adapter while others access different adapters. This creates highly variable effective matrix shapes, making fixed kernel schedules suboptimal. We compare against sLoRA [ 36 ], which uses stage-specific scheduling for the expand and shrink phases of LoRA execu-tion. However, within each stage, the fixed kernel is largely agnostic to how requests are distributed across adapters. By contrast, VDCores adapts the 𝜇 op flows of each adapter to the realized batch composition, improving SM occupancy and reducing makespan by up to 3.47x, as shown in Figure 14. 

6.3 Runtime Efficiency Study 

In this section, we focus on evaluating the design decisions in the virtual machine and executor by studying their perfor-mance implications. 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K 

> Block size
> 0
> 1000
> 2000
> 3000
> 4000
> Throughput (GB/s)
> VDCs-read
> VDCs-write
> TMA-read
> TMA-write

Figure 16. VDCores (VDCs) memory operation efficiency at different block sizes.        

> Metric Cycles Start up latency 422 ns
> 𝜇 op Initialization interval 22ns Ave memory load 34ns Ave memory st 43ns Ave memory ctrl 22ns CUDA-core overhead 3.1%

Figure 17. Runtime latency metrics and aggregate run-time overhead. Captured by NCU Compute Profiler. Single   

> cycle
> + Alloc + Co-routine + Pipelined Current

1

2

3

4 

> Normalized performance
> 1.00x
> 1.52x
> 3.28x
> 3.89x 4.19x

Figure 18. Memory-core Optimization Breakdown. 

Compute-bounded and memory-bounded kernels. We measure the runtime overhead of VDCores on representa-tive compute- and memory-intensive operators. We compare against VDE-manual, a hand-crafted warp-specialized im-plementation with similar pipelining but minimal overhead, and against PyTorch as a reference single-kernel baseline. As shown in Figure 15, VDCores stays within 8% of peak performance on average, while sustaining over 82% of peak FLOPS and 93% of peak memory bandwidth on H100. 

Memory virtual core overhead. We sweep I/O block size and compare VDE’s effective bandwidth against the raw TMA issue rate to measure when virtual-core overhead is amortized. As Figure 16 shows, bandwidth approaches raw-instruction performance at 4KB for writes and 16KB for reads. Because real LLM operators typically move data at or above these granularities, the overhead of the virtual memory core is well amortized in practice. Figure 17 further breaks down the runtime cost over the lifetime of a virtual core and estimates that the aggregate overhead consumes only 3.1% of total core time. We ablate the key optimizations used to achieve this low overhead. We focus on instruction issue, because VMC throughput is largely determined by the control path that prepares and dispatches memory 𝜇 ops. As Figure 18 shows, adding allocation support reduces latency from 366.9 to 242.2 cycles. Introducing coroutine execution further reduces la-tency to 112.0 cycles by improving overlap within the mem-ory core, and pipelining lowers it again to 94.2 cycles. The final design reaches 87.6 cycles overall, yielding a 4.2× speedup over the naive implementation. 

> 11 Zijian He, Adrian Sampson, Yiying Zhang, and Zhiyuan Guo

## 7 Related Work 

Framework, Abstaction and Compiler for Asynchronous GPUs. CUTLASS, FlashInfer, and ThunderKittens provide optimized GPU libraries and templates that package expert implementation techniques such as tiling, pipelining, prefetch-ing, and warp specialization [ 28 , 41 , 44 ]. Flux and Mirage Per-sistent Kernel further optimize communication and persistent-kernel execution by structuring kernels into stages that overlap data movement and computation [ 10 , 16 ]. These frameworks make it easier to build high-performance GPU kernels, but they still express execution as specialized kernels with pre-planned overlap and synchronization. TVM, Relax, Fireiron, Triton, Cypress, and TileLang raise the abstraction level of GPU programming by generating optimized kernels from higher-level tensor, scheduling, or tile-based descriptions [ 13 , 20 , 26 , 43 , 45 , 46 ]. TAWA [ 11 ]further targets asynchronous GPU kernels by automatically applying warp specialization and pipeline scheduling. These systems reduce programmer effort and improve intra-kernel optimization, but their generated programs remain primar-ily kernel-centric: tiling, fusion, layout, and synchronization decisions are made before execution. VDCores differs by fun-damental programming model shift: exposing memory and compute work as separate dependency-connected 𝜇 ops, and results in assigning the coordination into a runtime layer. 

Dataflow and Access-Execution Decoupled Architectures. 

Classic dataflow machines execute operations when their operands become ready, exposing parallelism through explicit dependencies rather than fixed instruction order [ 4, 5, 18 , 34 ]. Decoupled Access/Execute architectures separate memory-access and compute streams to hide latency through producer– consumer queues [ 3, 12 , 17 , 21 , 39 , 47 ]. Many ML acceler-ators similarly use dataflow-style execution to make tensor movement, reuse, and pipeline structure explicit in hardware [ 1, 14 , 15 , 24 ]. These systems rely on specialized hardware, fixed dataflows, or general token-matching mechanisms. VD-Cores keeps the principles, but restricts them to GPU-friendly ML 𝜇 ops and virtual flows and further use software cores to realize them on existing GPUs. Compilers for dataflow, DAE, and spatial accelerators map programs into explicit graphs, streams, or hardware dataflows. They typically perform dependence analysis, tiling, place-ment, buffering, and scheduling to expose locality and par-allelism to the target architecture. Ember applies compiler optimization for decoupled accelerator to irregular embedding operations in recommender models, improving performance and performance per watt [ 38 ]. VDCores converts the GPU to virutal decoupled hardware, further leveraging the existing compiling methods for global optimization. 

## 8 Discussion 

Compiler support for VDCores. We view VDCores as a suitable abstraction layer for high-performance compilers. At 

𝜇 op layer, Compilers could now generate efficient handler for single leveraging their static packing and local schedule optimization. At system level, similar to dataflow compilers, compilers could be integrated into 𝜇 op generator and help with translating ML operators into 𝜇 op streams, leveraging the VDCores runtime harness of performance and correct-ness. This split preserves compiler efficiency where it works best, while avoiding ad-hoc runtime tuning and leave them for VDCores’s efficient runtime, also further support future learning-based or AI-assisted optimization. 

Evolving Asynchronous GPU. New GPU generations con-tinue to introduce new asynchronous resource domains be-yond traditional CUDA-core execution. For example, recent architectures such as Blackwell expose new tensor-memory inside each SM, and modern GPUs increasingly provide dis-tributed shared-memory capabilities across SM groups. VDCores can absorb these hardware changes without changing the decoupled model: we can either extend existing virtual-core implementations (e.g., VMC/VCC behaviors) or add new virtual-core types for the new resource domain. For instance, a additional specialized computation virtual cores can be introduced with keeping the same dependency-driven coordination. On new virtual cores, VDCores runtime design could be reused, and it could integrate and overlap seamlessly into VDCores system. 

Supporting Heterogeneous Accelerators and Tiered Mem-ory System. VDCores shows good fit for emerging hetero-geneous accelerators which explicitly decouple the hardware units for computation, memory movement and communi-cation. For example, in AWS Trainium [ 9 ], those jobs are handled by Neuron Core, DMA and CC-Core respectively. VDCores decoupled model extends naturally beyond GPUs, each resource domain is represented as a virtual core, and cross-domain coordination is expressed through explicit de-pendency exchange rather than implicit launch order. When all backends implement the same decoupled inter-face and memory model, VDCores can also serve as a bridge abstraction across different heterogeneous hardware. the com-piler/runtime can compose end-to-end pipelines across dis-similar devices without rewriting operator semantics for each target. Compared with ad-hoc cross-device orchestration, this design preserves overlap opportunities while maintaining a uniform integration boundary, similar to inside the single GPU device. 

## 9 Conclusion 

We present VDCores, a virtual decoupled-core programming framework and runtime for modern asynchronous GPUs. VD-Cores decouples asynchronous resource units, enables auto-overlapping and dynamic-fusion optimizations for LLM serv-ing, and enables composable optimization. We believe this de-sign offers a practical path toward a unified, high-performance systems stack for next-generation LLM workloads. 

> 12

## References 

[1] Dennis Abts, Jonathan Ross, Jonathan Sparling, Mark Wong-VanHaren, Max Baker, Tom Hawkins, Andrew Bell, John Thompson, Temes-ghen Kahsai, Garrin Kimmell, Jennifer Hwang, Rebekah Leslie-Hurd, Michael Bye, E. R. Creswick, Matthew Boyd, Mahitha Venigalla, Evan Laforge, Jon Purdy, Purushotham Kamath, Dinesh Maheshwari, Michael Beidler, Geert Rosseel, Omar Ahmad, Gleb Gagarin, Richard Czekalski, Ashay Rane, Sahil Parmar, Jeff Werner, Jim Sproch, Adrián Macías, and Brian Kurtz. Think fast: A tensor streaming processor (TSP) for accelerating deep learning workloads. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Computer Architecture , ISCA ’20, pages 145–158. IEEE, 2020. [2] AMD. Amd cdna architecture: Enabling high-performance compute. https://www .amd .com/en/technologies/cdna, 2023. Highlights asyn-chronous compute and memory pipelines. [3] José-María Arnau, Joan-Manuel Parcerisa, and Polychronis Xekalakis. Boosting mobile GPU performance with a decoupled access/execute fragment processor. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture , ISCA ’12, pages 84–93. IEEE Computer Society, 2012. [4] Arvind and David E. Culler. Dataflow architectures. Annual Review of Computer Science , 1:225–253, 1986. [5] Arvind and Rishiyur S. Nikhil. Executing a program on the MIT tagged-token dataflow architecture. IEEE Transactions on Computers ,39(3):300–318, 1990. [6] Arvind Arvind and D Culler. Dataflow architectures. Annual Review of Computer Science , 1:225–253, 11 2003. [7] Michael Bauer, Henry Cook, and Brucek Khailany. Cudadma: optimiz-ing gpu memory bandwidth via warp specialization. In Proceedings of 2011 International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , SC ’11, Seattle, Washington, 2011. Association for Computing Machinery. [8] Michael Bauer, Sean Treichler, and Alex Aiken. Singe: leveraging warp specialization for high performance on gpus. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming , PPoPP ’14, page 119–130, Orlando, Florida, USA, 2014. Association for Computing Machinery. [9] Nafea Bshara. Aws trainium: the journey for designing and optimiza-tion full stack ml hardware. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM In-ternational Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3 , pages 4–4, 2024. [10] Li-Wen Chang, Wenlei Bao, Qi Hou, Chengquan Jiang, Ningxin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Xuanrun Zhang, Zuquan Song, Chengji Yao, Ziheng Jiang, Haibin Lin, Xin Jin, and Xin Liu. Flux: Fast software-based communication overlap on gpus through kernel fusion, 2024. [11] Hongzheng Chen, Bin Fan, Alexander Collins, Bastian Hagedorn, Evghenii Gaburov, Masahiro Masuda, Matthew Brookhart, Chris Sul-livan, Jason Knight, Zhiru Zhang, et al. Tawa: Automatic warp spe-cialization for modern gpus with asynchronous references. In 2026 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Opti-mization (CGO) , pages 255–267. IEEE, 2026. [12] Tao Chen and G. Edward Suh. Efficient data supply for hardware accel-erators with prefetching and access/execute decoupling. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microar-chitecture , MICRO-49, pages 46:1–46:12. IEEE Computer Society, 2016. [13] Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Haichen Shen, Yuwei Wang, Yida Hu, Luis Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. Tvm: An automated end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learning. In OSDI , Carlsbad, CA, USA, 2018. [14] Tianshi Chen, Zidong Du, Ninghui Sun, Jia Wang, Chengyong Wu, Yunji Chen, and Olivier Temam. DianNao: A small-footprint high-throughput accelerator for ubiquitous machine-learning. In Proceed-ings of the 19th International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems , ASPLOS ’14, pages 269–284. ACM, 2014. [15] Yunji Chen, Tao Luo, Shaoli Liu, Shijin Zhang, Liqiang He, Jia Wang, Ling Li, Tianshi Chen, Zhiwei Xu, Ninghui Sun, and Olivier Temam. DaDianNao: A machine-learning supercomputer. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchi-tecture , MICRO-47, pages 609–622. IEEE Computer Society, 2014. [16] Xinhao Cheng, Zhihao Zhang, Yu Zhou, Jianan Ji, Jinchen Jiang, Zepeng Zhao, Ziruo Xiao, Zihao Ye, Yingyi Huang, Ruihang Lai, Hongyi Jin, Bohan Hou, Mengdi Wu, Yixin Dong, Anthony Yip, Zi-hao Ye, Songting Wang, Wenqin Yang, Xupeng Miao, Tianqi Chen, and Zhihao Jia. Mirage persistent kernel: A compiler and runtime for mega-kernelizing tensor programs, 2025. [17] Neal Clayton Crago and Sanjay J. Patel. OUTRIDER: Efficient memory latency tolerance with decoupled strands. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture , ISCA ’11, pages 117–128. ACM, 2011. [18] Jack B. Dennis and David P. Misunas. A preliminary architecture for a basic data-flow processor. In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Symposium on Computer Architecture , pages 126–132. ACM, 1975. [19] Groq Inc. Groq lpu architecture. https://groq .com/architecture/, 2023. Dataflow-style execution with explicit decoupling. [20] Bastian Hagedorn, Archibald Samuel Elliott, Henrik Barthels, Rastislav Bodik, and Vinod Grover. Fireiron: A scheduling language for high-performance linear algebra on gpus. In PLDI , London, UK, 2020. [21] Tae Jun Ham, Juan L. Aragón, and Margaret Martonosi. DeSC: Decou-pled supply-compute communication management for heterogeneous architectures. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual IEEE/ACM Interna-tional Symposium on Microarchitecture , MICRO-48, pages 191–203. ACM, 2015. [22] Ke Hong, Guohao Dai, Jiaming Xu, et al. Flashdecoding++: Faster large language model inference on gpus, 2023. [23] Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [24] Norman P. Jouppi et al. In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit. In ISCA , Toronto, Canada, 2017. [25] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) , Koblenz, Germany, 2023. [26] Ruihang Lai, Junru Shao, Siyuan Feng, Steven Lyubomirsky, Bohan Hou, Wuwei Lin, Zihao Ye, Hongyi Jin, Yuchen Jin, Jiawei Liu, Lesh-eng Jin, Yaxing Cai, Ziheng Jiang, Yong Wu, Sunghyun Park, Prakalp Srivastava, Jared Roesch, Todd C. Mowry, and Tianqi Chen. Relax: Composable abstractions for end-to-end dynamic machine learning. In 

ASPLOS , Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2025. [27] NVIDIA Corporation. Nvidia hopper architecture in-depth. https:// developer .nvidia .com/blog/nvidia-hopper-architecture-in-depth/, 2022. Technical blog. [28] NVIDIA Corporation. Cutlass: Cuda templates for linear algebra subroutines. https://github .com/NVIDIA/cutlass, 2023. [29] NVIDIA Corporation. Nvidia blackwell architecture. https://resources .nvidia .com/en-us-blackwell-architecture?ncid =pa-srch-goog-587708, 2024. White paper. [30] NVIDIA Corporation. Nvidia tensor cores. https://www .nvidia .com/en-us/data-center/tensor-cores/, 2024. Accessed: 2026. [31] NVIDIA Corporation. Cuda c++ programming guide: Asynchronous barriers. https://docs .nvidia .com/cuda/cuda-programming-guide/04-special-topics/async-barriers .html, 2025. [32] NVIDIA Corporation. Cuda c++ programming guide: Asynchronous data copies. https://docs .nvidia .com/cuda/cuda-programming-guide/ 13 Zijian He, Adrian Sampson, Yiying Zhang, and Zhiyuan Guo 

04-special-topics/async-copies .html, 2025. Accessed: 2026. [33] NVIDIA Corporation. Cutlass blackwell forward at-tention main loop. https://github .com/NVIDIA/cutlass/ blob/a2439551c765c5393aebe557ee75d3a0412d2211/ examples/77 _blackwell _fmha/collective/ sm100 _fmha _fwd _mainloop _tma _warpspecialized .hpp, 2025. Accessed: 2025-11-20. [34] Gregory M. Papadopoulos and David E. Culler. Monsoon: An explicit token-store architecture. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual Interna-tional Symposium on Computer Architecture , ISCA ’90, pages 82–91. ACM, 1990. [35] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Brad-bury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , Vancouver, Canada, 2019. [36] Ying Sheng, Shiyi Cao, Dacheng Li, Coleman Hooper, Nicholas Lee, Shuo Yang, Christopher Chou, Banghua Zhu, Lianmin Zheng, Kurt Keutzer, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. S-lora: Serving thousands of concurrent lora adapters, 2024. [37] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 , 2019. [38] Marco Siracusa, Olivia Hsu, Victor Soria-Pardos, Joshua Randall, Ar-naud Grasset, Eric Biscondi, Doug Joseph, Randy Allen, Fredrik Kjol-stad, Miquel Moretó Planas, et al. Ember: A compiler for embed-ding operations on decoupled access-execute architectures. In 2026 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Opti-mization (CGO) , pages 150–163. IEEE, 2026. [39] James E. Smith. Decoupled access/execute computer architectures. In 

Proceedings of the 9th Annual Symposium on Computer Architecture ,ISCA ’82, pages 112–119. IEEE Computer Society, 1982. [40] Rupanshu Soi, Rohan Yadav, Fredrik Kjolstad, Alex Aiken, Maryam Mehri Dehnavi, Michael Garland, and Michael Bauer. Opti-mal software pipelining and warp specialization for tensor core gpus, 2025. [41] Benjamin Spector, Jordan Juravsky, Stuart Sul, Owen Dugan, Dylan Lim, Dan Fu, Simran Arora, and Christopher Ré. Thunderkittens: Simple, fast, and adorable ai kernels. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , Vienna, Austria, 2024. [42] Benjamin Spector, Jordan Juravsky, Stuart Sul, Owen Dugan, Dy-lan Lim, Dan Fu, Simran Arora, and Christopher Ré. Look ma, no bubbles! designing a low-latency megakernel for llama-1b. https: //hazyresearch .stanford .edu/blog/2025-05-27-no-bubbles, 2025. Tech-nical blog. [43] Cypress Team. Cypress: A tile-based dsl for gpu programming. https: //github .com/cypress-dsl/cypress, 2024. [44] FlashInfer Team. Flashinfer: Efficient and flexible inference kernels for large language models. https://github .com/flashinfer-ai/flashinfer, 2024. [45] TileLang Team. Tilelang: A tile-level programming model for deep learning. https://github .com/tile-ai/tilelang, 2024. [46] Philippe Tillet, H. T. Kung, and David Cox. Triton: An intermediate language and compiler for tiled neural network computations. In 

Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages (MAPL) , Phoenix, AZ, USA, 2019. [47] Kai Wang and Calvin Lin. Decoupled affine computation for SIMT GPUs. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture , ISCA ’17, pages 295–306. ACM, 2017. [48] Mengdi Wu, Xinhao Cheng, Shengyu Liu, Chunan Shi, Jianan Ji, Man Kit Ao, Praveen Velliengiri, Xupeng Miao, Oded Padon, and Zhihao Jia. Mirage: A multi-level superoptimizer for tensor programs. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Imple-mentation (OSDI) , Boston, MA, USA, 2025. [49] Ted Zadouri, Markus Hoehnerbach, Jay Shah, Timmy Liu, Vijay Thakkar, and Tri Dao. Flashattention-4: Algorithm and kernel pipelin-ing co-design for asymmetric hardware scaling, 2026. [50] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Joseph E. Gon-zalez, Ion Stoica, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. Sglang: Efficient execution of structured language model programs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2024. 14