Title: Numerical Kernels on a Spatial Accelerator: A Study of Tenstorrent Wormhole

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.23343v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Mar 2026 01:25:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Numerical Kernels on a Spatial Accelerator: A Study of Tenstorrent Wormhole 

# MAYA TAYLOR, Siebel School of Computing and Data Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA 

# CARL PEARSON, Center for Computing Research, Sandia National Laboratories, USA 

# LUC BERGER-VERGIAT, Center for Computing Research, Sandia National Laboratories, USA 

# GIOVANNI LONG, Computer Science Department, University of California Santa Barbara, USA 

# JAN CIESKO, Center for Computing Research, Sandia National Laboratories, USA 

As AI accelerators gain prominence, their potential for traditional scientific computing workloads remains unclear. This paper explores Tenstorrent’s Wormhole architecture, a spatial computing platform designed for neural network acceleration, by implementing three numerical kernels and compos-ing them into a conjugate gradient solver. We present architecture-specific optimizations for sparse numerical algorithms, evaluate their performance against Nvidia GPUs, and expose both challenges and opportunities in port-ing numerical methods to spatial architectures. Our results demonstrate that AI accelerators merit consideration for workloads traditionally dominated by CPUs and GPUs, and more work should be invested in understanding the capabilities of these architectures and making them accessible to the scientific computing community. CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Parallel algorithms ; •

Computer systems organization → Data flow architectures ; • Mathe-matics of computing → Solvers .Additional Key Words and Phrases: sparse iterative solvers, high-performance computing, stencil computations 

This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research, Department of Energy Computational Science Graduate Fellowship under Award Number DE-SC0025528. Sandia National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology & Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International Inc., for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525. SAND#0000-XXXXX This paper describes objective technical results and analysis. Any subjective views or opinions that might be expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department of Energy or the United States Government. This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof. We would like to thank the Sandia advanced architectures testbed program for provid-ing computing resources for this publication. Additionally, would like to thank Felix LeClair, Nikola Cvetković, and Neil Sexton of Tenstorrent for their frequent technical discussions. Authors’ Contact Information: Maya Taylor, Siebel School of Computing and Data Sci-ence, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA, mayat4@illinois.edu; Carl Pearson, Center for Computing Research, Sandia National Laboratories, Albu-querque, NM, USA, cwpears@sandia.gov; Luc Berger-Vergiat, Center for Computing Research, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, USA, lberge@sandia.gov; Giovanni Long, Computer Science Department, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, giovanni_long@ucsb.edu; Jan Ciesko, Center for Computing Research, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, USA, jciesko@sandia.gov. 

1 Introduction 

The advent of compute-intensive neural networks has driven prolif-eration of novel computer architectures designed to accelerate train-ing and inference, including products developed by Cerebras, Graph Core, Groq, SambaNova, and Tenstorrent, among others. These ar-chitectures broadly feature small, simple processing elements (PEs) with single-instruction multiple-data (SIMD) parallelism for high-throughput math, small scratchpad memories, and a user-controlled network-on-chip (NoC). Differentiating factors include physical as-sembly techniques (e.g. Cerebras “Wafer-Scale Engine”), availability of global DRAM or high bandwidth memory (HBM) accessible to PEs, vectorization, and openness of toolchain. These have been referred to as “spatial” or “dataflow” architec-tures, with both terms emphasizing the concern of data placement and movement, demanding more explicit control over data and parallelism than CPUs and GPUs. Despite the resulting higher pro-gramming complexity of spatial architectures, it has proven tractable to manage data movement and parallelization (whether manually or automatically) for high performance execution, particularly in the context of regular dense-tensor operations present in neural networks. More recently, these architectures have also been used to demonstrate orders-of-magnitude acceleration for more traditional modeling and simulation (modsim) workloads with the combined, sustained efforts of a team of experts ranging from domain scientists to micro-architectural implementers [7, 10]. Despite the targeted successes of using these architectures, fun-damental questions remain: 

• What kinds of numerical algorithms can be effectively im-plemented on these architectures? 

• Are past successes on a specific platform transferable to architectures with similar constraints? 

• Can these algorithms be expressed in a way familiar to tra-ditional HPC (e.g., a CUDA-like massively-parallel offload model)? This work presents an initial effort to investigate these questions by implementing a selection of numerical kernels on Tenstorrent’s Wormhole architecture, in addition to a full Conjugate Gradient Solve implementation. We make four primary contributions: (1) Implementing and evaluating three key numerical kernels on Wormhole: basic vector arithmetic, global reduction, and stencil computations. (2) Demonstrating a modsim-relevant numerical algorithm (pre-conditioned conjugate gradient solve) at 32-bit precision on Wormhole for the first time.   

> arXiv:2603.23343v1 [cs.PF] 24 Mar 2026 2•Taylor et al.

(3) Comparing performance achieved on Wormhole to Nvidia H100 via a GPU-style offload model. (4) Evaluating the additional performance achieved via a fused-kernel approach more suitable to Wormhole. Section 2 places this work in context of related work on spa-tial architectures. Section 3 describes the Wormhole architecture. The implementation and performance of basic vector arithmetic is described in Section 4, global reduction in Section 5, and stencil computations in Section 6. Section 7 describes the implementation of the conjugate gradient solver using these building blocks. Sec-tion 7.2 provides an analysis of the performance results and Section 8 discusses future work. Finally, Sec. 9 concludes. 

2 Background and Related Work 

The work presented in this paper builds on Brown and Barton [ 2 ], which explores DDR access patterns and energy efficiency for a Jacobi iterative method on Tenstorrent’s earlier “Grayskull” archi-tecture. Grayskull and Wormhole share many architectural features, including a grid of simple processing elements with small local SRAM and a similar programming model. Wormhole extends this with support for additional datatypes (including FP32), higher mem-ory capacity, and optimizations for multi-device scaling [4]. Our work advances this earlier implementation with detailed analysis of key building blocks for numerical algorithms on Worm-hole. We implement a more demanding iterative method with a 3D (rather than 2D) stencil pattern and stage intermediate values in on-chip SRAM rather than global DRAM for more effective use of the architecture. While Brown and Barton’s approach achieves per-formance similar to a single CPU core, our approach more closely matches datacenter GPU performance. Beyond Tenstorrent work, most prior work on modeling and simulation (modsim) algorithms for dataflow architectures targets Cerebras’ Wafer-Scale Engines (WSE). These works demonstrate that targeted implementations of specific algorithms can achieve excellent performance by exploiting hardware features, though this highlights the programmability challenges inherent to these plat-forms. Santos et al. [ 10 ] demonstrate superior strong scaling for molecu-lar dynamics on the WSE. Sai et al. [ 8 ] present a matrix-free con-jugate gradient solver for finite volume discretizations on Cere-bras WSE CS-2, analogous to our work but facing different chal-lenges on that platform. Tramm et al. [ 14 ] demonstrate Monte Carlo particle transport on Cerebras WSE at 32-bit precision with hardware-specific optimizations including hardware PRNGs and reduced-precision division. Related accelerator work includes Feldman et al. [ 5], who propose a hardware accelerator for sparse iterative solvers with architec-tural features similar to spatial architectures. Other work explores algorithm primitives rather than full solvers. De Fine Licht et al. [ 3 ]address mapping large stencil programs to distributed spatial com-puting systems. Sai et al. [ 9] implement automated high-order sten-cil computations on the Cerebras WSE CS-1 using single-precision floating point, mapping matrix dimensions into PE-local memory similarly to our approach. Schnyder [ 11 ] describes gather, all-gather, 

> Fig. 1. Block diagram of a Tensix core. Each core has 1.5MB of SRAM, 5 baby RISC-V cores, a vector compute unit (SFPU), and a matrix compute unit (FPU). Two of the baby RISC-V cores are connected to the NoC and manage data movement to/from DRAM and other cores. The other three baby RISC-V cores manage data movement to/from SRAM and the compute units.

and reduce-scatter collectives on Cerebras WSE with a formal per-formance model, potentially providing a template for modsim com-munication primitives in future work. To address programmability challenges, some work provides higher-level abstractions. Woo et al. [ 17 ] present the WSE Field-equation API for Cerebras WSE, demonstrating implicit and explicit time discretizations of the heat equation at 32-bit precision, includ-ing a conjugate gradient solve for the implicit formulation. Van Essendelft et al. [ 16 ] extend this with a system-level compiler for massively-parallel dataflow architectures. Their approach uses some PEs as control cores to coordinate other PEs, though its applicability to smaller accelerators like Wormhole remains unclear. 

3 Tenstorrent Wormhole 

The Tenstorrent n300d is a PCIe card featuring two “Tensix” Worm-hole accelerator dies. The PCIe card is equipped with 24GB of GDDR6 DRAM accessible by both Tensix dies. Each Tensix die is composed of a 2D grid of 10x12 compute elements, of which 80 are designated for compute (“Tensix cores”), with the remainder al-located to DRAM, PCIe, ARC, or Ethernet management. In addition, the chip has a 2D Torus NoC for data movement between cores and DRAM. The programmer interacts primarily with memory move-ment cores and Tensix cores, which are the focus of the remainder of this section. Each Tensix core has approximately 1.5MB of local SRAM, 5 RISC-V cores (“baby RISC-Vs”) which manage data and control-flow but have very limited compute capabilities, and compute units comprised of a vector compute unit (SFPU) and a matrix unit (FPU). Figure 1 illustrates the architecture at a high level, with an outline of a typical data flow through a Tensix core: Numerical Kernels on a Spatial Accelerator: A Study of Tenstorrent Wormhole • 3

(1) First, data is moved from the NoC to SRAM by one of the data movement cores. (2) Data is moved from SRAM to registers by the unpacker. (3) The compute core prompts computation on one of the com-pute units. (4) The result is moved from registers to SRAM by the packer. (5) Data is moved from SRAM to the NoC by the second data movement core. To program the Wormhole device, we use the tt-metal API, which provides low-level access to the Tensix cores and DRAM. This API is exposed at the C++ level, and the programmer is responsible for man-aging data movement to/from DRAM, between cores, and to/from the compute units within a core, as is described later. While the NoC provides physical connectivity only between cardinal neighbors, the programmer can send messages from one core to any other, with the routing taken care of by the hardware. Similarly to existing accelerator programming models, tt-metal programs require a C++ host program which runs on the CPU and coordinates memory movement to and from the device, as well as kernel launches. The tt-metal programmer also writes three device kernels: one for each of the NoC cores and one for the compute cores collectively. All three of these kernels run concurrently on the device, using synchronization mechanisms provided by the tt-metal API and discussed below. 

3.1 Tiles 

The most central component of the tt-metal API is the tile abstraction ,which dictates data movement and computation patterns. Tiles are 2D arrays of 32x32 elements, or 1024 elements total. This tile size is recommended to best utilize the hardware registers and compute units within a Tensix core. In memory, tiles are stored in row-major order and 16x16 element subtiles are interleaved as shown in Figure 2. In the typical tt-metal use case this interleaving and physical layout is abstracted from the programmer, who can think of tiles as simple 2D arrays, but for our purposes (particularly for the irregular data movement patterns we employ in Section 6) understanding the physical layout is important. 

3.2 Circular Buffers 

Data movement is regulated through the use of “circular buffers”, which are FIFO queues statically allocated in SRAM and used to stage data for movement out of the core or in to a register. These circular buffers facilitate pipelining of all data movement and act as a synchronization mechanisms between the 5 baby RISC-V cores, encouraging an asynchronous, dataflow programming style within a Tensix core. The tt-metal API provides functionality to reserve, push, and pop from these circular buffers. In the most common use case, a circular buffer is reserved for movement of tiles from SRAM to the FPU or SFPU source registers (operated on by one data movement core and the unpacker), and a second is reserved for movement from the destination registers back to SRAM (operated on by the packer and the second data movement core). 

> Fig. 2. Layout of a 32x32 tile logically (left) and physically (right). Colors and indices are used to indicate the interleaving of subtiles in physical memory.

3.3 Compute Units 

The tile abstraction is particularly well-suited for matrix operations common to machine learning workloads, and is also reflected in the capabilities of the two compute units within each Tensix core: the FPU (“Floating Point Unit”) and SFPU (“Scalar Floating Point Unit”). 

The FPU: The FPU is designed to operate in a SPMD fashion only on sub-tiles of 8x16 16-bit elements. Table 1 summarizes the single-cycle capabilities of this matrix engine (FPU), demonstrating its utility for matrix multiplication in particular. While the FPU is designed for such matrix operations, it also supports element-wise arithmetic and reductions on tiles, but it is restricted to a maximum of 19-bit data formats (for our purposes, we consider restriction to BF16 operations). Operation Size Matrix Multiply 8x16 x 16x16 = 8x16 Reduction 16x16 Element-wise Add/Sub/Mul 8x16 

> Table 1. Single-cycle capabilities of the Wormhole FPU.

The SFPU: In comparison, the SFPU is designed for vector oper-ations on tiles, and can perform basic element-wise arithmetic as well as more complicated functions (like exponentiation and square root). It can be considered a traditional SIMD unit with 32 lanes of 32 bits per lane, requiring 2 cycles for most element-wise arithmetic operations on 64 16-bit elements, or 32 16-bit elements per cycle. The SFPU supports both 16-bit and 32-bit formats. Both the FPU and SFPU require unpacking from SRAM to the source registers and subsequent packing from the destination regis-ters back to SRAM, but the SFPU additionally requires load-store 4 • Taylor et al. 

operations to move data from the registers to the vector lanes and back. For this reason, in addition to the lower compute throughput, the SFPU is substantially more expensive than the FPU. 

Registers: Additionally, each Tensix core has 2 source registers (SrcA and SrcB) and 1 destination register set (Dst). These registers are used to move data to and from the FPU or SFPU, and they are also designed around the tile layout. SrcA and SrcB have 64 rows of 16 datums, each datum being up to 19 bits wide. These registers serve as the source registers for the FPU only. The Dst register is not a single tile, but a set of tiles, and it serves as destination for both the FPU and both source and destination for the SFPU. It can be configured either as 16 tiles of 32x32 16-bit elements, or 8 tiles of 32x32 32-bit elements, supporting both 16-bit and 32-bit data paths. Data movement is also somewhat restricted in accordance with the tile construct. Most relevantly, reads from DRAM must be 32B aligned, and writes to DRAM must be 16B aligned. Reads and writes to/from the L1 SRAM on each PE must be 16B aligned. 

Subnormals: The compute units of the Wormhole card do not support denormal/subnormal [ 1, 6] computation and instead adopt a flush to zero approach. This approach enables a simpler and more area efficient implementation of the FPU and SFPU [ 13 , 15 ], but can lead to unexpected loss of precision in computation. One way to avoid this issue is to scale input vectors and matrix values to the nor-mal range ahead of computation and scale back after computation. For this reason we also recommend against monitoring a relative residual in the CG algorithm discussed in Section 7 but instead to use the absolute residual. 

3.4 Performance Tracing 

All performance tracing and monitoring for the Wormhole discussed below was accomplished using a combination of host-side kernel timing and the Tracy profiler, an open-source C++ profiler with device-side instrumentation [ 12 ]. The tt-metal API supports Tracy integration and instrumentation of both host and device code to create Tracy zones, which can then be visualized in the Tracy GUI. Tracy provides nanosecond-resolution timing information and can be used to visualize activity on each Tensix core over time, but we observed that extensive zone tracing had noticable impact on perfor-mance. In addition, we used more naive performance measurement techniques, such as removing portions of the algorithm and timing the remainder, similar to the profiling approach used by Brown and Barton [2]. 

4 Basic Arithmetic Operations 

Both the SFPU and FPU can perform basic element-wise arithmetic operations on tiles, including addition, subtraction, and multiplica-tion. As discussed above, the throughput of these operations differs between the two compute units, with the FPU generally achieving 128 operations per clock cycle limited to 19-bit data formats, while the SFPU supports both 16-bit and 32-bit formats, achieving 32 and 16 operations per clock cycle respectively. Figure 3 presents a roofline model for the Wormhole Tensix archi-tecture specific to 16-bit element-wise addition, where we consider only a single Tensix core and its local SRAM. The memory band-width is calculated based on the peak throughput of the packer and unpacker (64B/clk), as they move tiles from SRAM to registers and vice versa. The peak compute throughput varies based on the compute unit, the data type, and the operation, and we plot the SFPU and FPU boundaries assuming BF16 addition. Two implementation variants are plotted against this roofline model, one for the FPU and one for the SFPU. Both stream data in from DRAM via the NoC, perform vector addition, and stream the result back to DRAM, but the DRAM access patterns are not captured by this simplified roofline. For the FPU implementation, the arithmetic intensity is computed as 1 FLOP per 6 bytes moved, as each addition requires two elements read and one element written back. The FPU achieves near-peak performance. The SFPU implementation of 16-bit arithmetic performs substan-tially worse and is around 6 times slower than the FPU. The SFPU addition requires both packing and unpacking, similarly to the FPU, in addition to a copy operation to move data to Dst register (which has a limited BW of 32 B/cylce), and further load-store operations to move data from the Dst register to the vector lanes and back. In sum, we can approximate that the SFPU implentation has an arithmetic intensity of 1 FLOP per 16 bytes moved, as plotted in Figure 3. Due to the increased cost of SFPU operations, and therefore in-creased cost of any FP32 arithmetic on Wormhole, there is a strong incentive to use the FPU and minimal precision whenever possible, or coordinate SFPU usage with data movement. We explore both BF16 and FP32 implementations of the conjugate gradient solver in Section 7.2, but Wormhole is most suitable for BF16 workloads. 

5 Global Reduction 

To examine the implementation and performance of global collec-tive operations on the Wormhole architecture, we consider a global dot product operation across all Tensix cores on a single die and all tiles within a given Tensix. This operation is essential for many         

> 10 −210 −110 010 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> Pack/Unpack Memory BW Copy Memory BW FPU Peak FLOPs SFPU Peak FLOPs arithmetic intensity (FLOPs/Byte) performance (FLOPs/cycle) FPU Vector Addition SFPU Vector Addition
> Fig. 3. Roofline model for Wormhole Tensix architecture for 16-bit element-wise addition, with implementation variants for FPU and SFPU. Both data points represent runs with 256 tiles per Tensix core, or 262,144 elements. Numerical Kernels on a Spatial Accelerator: A Study of Tenstorrent Wormhole •5
> Fig. 4. Outline of the local reduction to compute partial dot-product result tiles for the dot product of two vectors 𝑞 and 𝑝 . Each core reduces its two input vectors to a single tile, which is then contributed to the global reduction either before/after reduction to a single scalar value.

numerical algorithms and provides a useful benchmark for evaluat-ing the performance of collective communication on the Wormhole architecture. The dot product takes two input vectors, distributed equally throughout the Wormhold grid, and involves element-wise mul-tiplication of both input vectors followed by a global sum reduction to produce a single scalar result. Every Tensix begins with a sub-set of corresponding tiles of both input vectors and computes the element-wise multiplication and partial sum locally. Specifically, each core produces one tile of output with a partial dot-product result, seen in Figure 4. A single tile can be reduced to a scalar value via the FPU (a simple reduction operation), or the SFPU, which requires a more expensive sequence of operations. Once every Tensix has computed its local partial sum tile, there are a couple variants of the global reduction implementation that we explore. Firstly, regarding reduction from a tile result to a single scalar, there are two implementation choices with different tradeoffs which are evaluated in section 5.1: 

• Reduce every tile to a single scalar on each core before sending it through the network for the final reduction. This decreases the amount of data sent through the network, but increases the amount of computation done on each core. 

• Send full tiles through the network and only reduce to a scalar at the root core. This increases the amount of data sent through the network, but decreases the amount of com-putation done on each core. In addition to this decision of communication granularity, there are multiple ways to route the global reduction through the Worm-hole NoC: 

• Send data leftward across all rows of cores and then upward to the top left core. This implementation has the advan-tage that Tensix cores must handle at most 2 incoming tiles, simplifying the routing logic, but doesn’t maximize parallel usage of the NoC. 

• Send data to the center of the grid, minimizing the dis-tance traveled. This implementation is more complicated and requires that the center core handle 4 incoming tiles, but achieves better parallel usage of the NoC. 

• Due to the routing capabilities of the Wormhole NoC, it is also possible for every core to send its tile directly to a root core, which then performs the entire reduction. This approach is likely to introduce a bottleneck at the root core, and is not explored in this work. In all of the implementation variants that we explored, partial sums of varying granularity are sent through the NoC and reduced further at every hop. At every core, only the sum of all incoming partial results is sent onward. 

5.1 Partial Result Granularity 

We compare the two variants of the dot product communication granularity as the grid size scales, using the SFPU FP32 element-wise multiplication and reduction. The first variant (method 1) reduces each Tensix’s data to a scalar, while in the second variant (method 2) the final reduction happens only at the root. In both approaches, the scalar result is then multicast back to all cores. Figure 5 illustrates the performance of these two approaches using 64 tiles per core and the naive reduction network pattern (left and then upward). The two granularity approaches are very similar in performance, with method 1 performing slightly better overall by 1.8% at the largest scale. As expected, the methods converge as the grid size decreases to a single Tensix core. This demonstrates that while the NoC is incredibly low latency and the SFPU 32-bit arithmetic high latency, reducing data transfer size at the expense of additional compute does still marginally improve performance at larger scales.       

> 010 20 30 40 50 60
> .1 .11 .12 number of cores time/iter (ms) method1 method2
> Fig. 5. Weak scaling of the dot product, using two different reduction meth-ods with the SFPU FP32 implementation and 64 tiles per core. Method 1 reduces to a scalar on each core, and method 2 reduces only at the final core.

5.2 Network Routing Patterns 

We also explored two different network routing patterns for the global reduction operation. The first pattern (naive) routes data leftward across all rows of cores and then upward to the top left core, while the second pattern (center) routes data to the center of the grid, minimizing the distance traveled. In this comparison, the latter approach is expected to consistently outperform the former, 6 • Taylor et al.      

> 010 20 30 40 50
> −10
> 0
> 10
> number of cores
> speedup (%)
> 1 tile
> 4 tiles
> 64 tiles
> 128 tiles
> Fig. 6. Analysis of speedup achieved with the center pattern over the naive. Results show time per iteration averaged over 100 iterations.

as it increases parallel usage of the NoC. We explore this tradeoff to determine whether the added complexity of the center routing pattern in implementation is justified by performance gains. Figure 6 compares the two routing patterns as the problem size scales using method 2 of partial result granularity (reducing to a scalar only at the end). The results demonstrate that the center routing performs very similarly to the naive pattern, especially as the problem size increases and the local compute dominates over network communication time. The center pattern achieves around a 15% speedup when using a single tile per core, but at 128 tiles per core the speedup is negligible. To the left of Figure 6, the speedup is negative, due to the increased complexity of the center routing pattern computation outweighing the benefits of reduced communication time. Overall, these results suggest that while the center routing pattern can provide some performance benefits at small problem sizes, the network is so low latency that the naive pattern is sufficient for larger problem sizes. 

6 Stencil Collectives 

The third numerical kernel we consider is a 7-point 3D stencil com-putation. Stencils are widely used in scientific computing appli-cations, particularly for solving differential equations using finite difference methods. They involve updating each point in a grid based on a weighted combination of its neighboring points. The 7-point stencil specifically refers to a 3D grid where each point is updated based on its six immediate neighbors (left, right, up, down, front, back) and itself. Our contribution in this section focuses on adapting the stencil computation to the Wormhole architecture, specifically the con-straint of the tile data format and related data movement restrictions. Additionally, we discuss the mapping of a 3D stencil grid to the 2D grid of Tensix cores, and how this mapping influences data locality and communication patterns during the stencil computation. 

6.1 Data Distribution 

To distribute our 3D stencil grid to the Tensix grid, we collapse the third dimension of the stencil onto the plane. Tiles of grid data are laid out in row-major order, and each Tensix core is allocated a column of tiles. For simplicity, we assume that the grid is evenly divisible by tiles in the horizontal plane. Each core is allocated 𝑁 𝑧 

64x16 tiles the stencil where 𝑁 𝑧 is the height of the 3D grid. We choose tiles of 64x16 instead of 32x32 to align better with the layout of tiles in memory, as discussed in 3, to facilitate the stencil data manipulation outlined below. Figure 7 illustrates this data distribu-tion for a small example where each Tensix is allocated three tiles of a 192x48x3 stencil grid. 

> Fig. 7. Data distribution of a 3D grid across a 3x3 Wormhole sub-grid of Tensix cores. The 3D domain is broken up into tiles of 64x16 elements in the horizontal plane. Each Tensix core is allocated 3 tiles, which make up a column as highlighted. Data is row-major within each tile.

Under this layout, each core can update all elements of its local data using only data from its four neighboring cores in the cardinal directions, in addition to tile data in the vertical direction, which are local to the Tensix core. Figure 8 illustrates the 7-point stencil and how it maps to tiles and cores; every element of every tile requires data from the North, South, East, and West tiles, which may reside on neighboring cores, in addition to the local above and below tiles. The vertical stencil contributions can be computed easily, as no NoC communication is required and simply adding the center tile with the above and below achieves the vertical portion of the stencil for all grid elements on the center tile. The horizontal stencil values, however, are more complicated because (1) they may reside on neighboring cores, and (2) they have different indeces within the tile compared to the center element, so basic element-wise addition is insufficient. During every stencil operation, each core therefore performs both an exchange of all four boundary data with its four neighbors, and then the necessary shifting to align stencil elements and prepare for element-wise addition. 

6.2 Tile Shift for the Stencil Computation 

In Tensix compute units, all computations happen in SPMD fashion at the tile scale. In order to add two elements 𝑎 and 𝑏 , the program-mer needs to create two tiles, ensure that 𝑎 and 𝑏 are at the same position in each tile, and add the tiles together. The tile constraint particularly complicates the stencil computation. For example, given a tile of elements 𝑥 𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 , the northern com-ponent of each element is 𝑥 𝑖,𝑗 −1,𝑘 . To add the northern element to the center, we therefore need to construct a tile which contains the 

𝑥 𝑖,𝑗 −1,𝑘 elements at positions 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 . This is accomplished by “shift-ing” all the elements in the original tile down by one row, such Numerical Kernels on a Spatial Accelerator: A Study of Tenstorrent Wormhole • 7

> (a) Basic 7-point stencil for a single grid point in 3D
> (b) 7-point stencil with tiles
> (c) Stencil from above for two grid point examples

Fig. 8. Visualization of the 7-point stencil in Tenstorrent’s tile-centric data format. The center point/tile is highlighted in purple. Figures (a) and (b) show the stencil on a single data point and extended to a tile. The yellow column highlights the tiles that reside on the same Tensix core. Figure (c) shows the stencil from above, demonstrating how each element of a tile needs North, South, East, and West elements, which may reside on other tiles/cores.    

> (a) Original tile (b) North (c) South
> (d) East (e) West

Fig. 9. To add the four horizontal stencil components to the center tile, we first construct tiles for each component with elements shifted appropriately. Colors are used to denote how elements move as they are shifted in each of the four directions. Blank tiles denote elements that must be retrieved from a neighboring tile, or filled with the appropriate boundary condition. For this small 4x3 tile example, scaling and doing an element-wise addition of the 5 components depicted would accurately compute the horizontal plane portion of the stencil. 

that northern elements are now at coordinates that align with their corresponding center elements. Adding this shifted tile of northern elements to the center tile achieves one component of the stencil. Figure 9 illustrates this idea on a small example of a 4x3 tile, leaving the halo, or boundary, elements grey to denote that they are not resident on the current tile. To implement the shift, we augmented the open source tt-metal API with a function that manually increments and decrements the read pointers of a circular buffers, similarly to previous work [ 2]. Note that because tile pointers must align at 32B, pointer manipula-tion is restrained and pointers can only be incremented or decre-mented by multiples of 32B. Becuase of our choice of 64x16 element tiles, this maps to 1 row of a tile. The northern elements can be produced by: 

• Decrementing the read pointer by one row of elements (32B above the original tile). 

• And, performing a copy operation to a new tile, feeding in the new pointer. The southern tile can be generated in a similar manner (increment-ing the pointer instead of decrementing). The eastern and western tiles require a shift left and right, which can’t be achieved directly by pointer manipulation. Instead, this shift requires: 

• A tile transpose, 8 • Taylor et al. 

> Fig. 10. Visualization of the tile transpose operation, tracking the eastern and western boundary column. The transpose is performed on 4 16x16 subtiles, which breaks the boundary columns into 4 discontiguous rows.

• Followed by a shift up or down, incrementing the read pointer to get the eastern elements and decrementing to get the western elements. 

• Finally, a second transpose to return the tile to its original orientation. Once the shift operations are complete, the halo elements (shown in grey in Figure 9) are filled in from neighboring cores via the NoC before the stencil operations proceed. 

6.3 Tile Transpose for Contiguous Boundary Exchange 

When building the north and south tiles, the boundary is a single row of 16 elements that can be filled by a neighbor in a single contiguous write on the NoC. For the east and west tiles, 64 elements along a column must be exchanged, which can not be done with a single write. We approach these boundary columns by transposing the tile, performing the communication, and transposing back. This ensures that the exchanged data is as contigous as possible. The tile transpose operation is provided by the matrix unit and transposes 1024 elements as 4 16x16 sub-matrices. The 64-element halo column on the East or West boundary is therefore broken into 4 discontiguous 16-element rows, requiring 4 separate sends and receives to exchange the entire domain. Figure 10 tracks the these boundaries through the transpose to visualize the transpose opera-tion and the resulting discontiguity of the boundary data. This hard-ware constraint was the primary factor in choosing 64x16 tiles, as this operation is much more complicated assuming a 32x32 element layout, and as a consequence exchanging halo data in the east/west direction is four times more expensive than in the north/south di-rection. For the boundary tiles at the edge of the global domain, the halo elements are filled by setting them to zero, although another boundary condition could be implemented similarly. Figure 11 evaluates the weak scaling performance of the 7-point stencil. The stencil weak scales almost perfectly, except for some unexpected additional costs incurred in the smallest configuration of a single core. Further performance analysis is performed by elim-inating various components of the stencil to isolate the bottleneck. First, we investigate the performance of the halo exchange: the “no halo” configuration in 11 eliminates the halo exchange, and shows that the 1x1 and 2x2 grid configurations incur some unre-lated overhead that is not present in larger configurations. This       

> 010 20 30 40 50 60
> 0.57
> 0.58
> 0.59
> 0.6
> number of cores time/iter (ms) total no halo no zero fill neither
> Fig. 11. Weak scaling of the SpMV. These results use 64 tiles per core and the FPU for BF16 operations. Results are averaged over 1000 iterations. To evaluate the contribution of different aspects of the stencil computation, we show results with and without halo exchange and zero fill for boundary conditions.

overhead is captured in the “no zero fill” results, which eliminate the code that handles setting halo elements to zero when there is no neighboring core. Filling the boundary condition with zero is un-expectedly expensive due to the high latency load and store access of the baby RISC-V’s to the L1, and this overhead is more exposed in the small configurations. The “neither” result removes both the halo and zero fill overheads, demonstrating that without these com-ponents, the stencil scales perfectly as expected. In practice, this overhead is only significant for small Tensix core counts, which are unlikely to be used for real workloads. The remaining runtime is dominated by the local stencil compu-tation, which involves the tile shifts, transposes, and element-wise additions. The local compute is much more expensive than the com-munication, demonstrating the strength of the Wormhole NoC for stencil workloads. 

7 Conjugate Gradient Implementation 

To evaluate the suitability of the Wormhole architecture for more complex numerical algorithms, we combine the components de-scribed above to implement a preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) solver for the 7-point stencil finite difference approximation on a 3D structured grid with zero Dirichlet boundary conditions. The traditional PCG algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1. Numerical Kernels on a Spatial Accelerator: A Study of Tenstorrent Wormhole • 9

Algorithm 1 Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient (PCG) for 𝐴𝑥 = 𝑏 

Require: Symmetric positive definite 𝑨 ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑛 , 𝒃 ∈ R𝑛 , SPD preconditioner 𝑴 , initial guess 𝒙 0, threshold 𝜀 . 

> 1:

𝒓 0 ← 𝒃 − 𝑨𝒙 0 ⊲ residual  

> 2:

Solve 𝑴𝒛 0 = 𝒓 0 ⊲ apply (left) preconditioner  

> 3:

𝒑 0 ← 𝒛 0 

> 4:

for 𝑘 = 0, 1, 2, . . . do  

> 5:

𝒒 𝑘 ← 𝑨𝒑 𝑘  

> 6:

𝛿 𝑘 ← 𝒓 ⊤ 

> 𝑘

𝒛 𝑘  

> 7:

𝛼 𝑘 ← 𝛿 𝑘 /( 𝒑 ⊤ 

> 𝑘

𝒒 𝑘 ) 

> 8:

𝒙 𝑘 +1 ← 𝒙 𝑘 + 𝛼 𝑘 𝒑 𝑘  

> 9:

𝒓 𝑘 +1 ← 𝒓 𝑘 − 𝛼 𝑘 𝒒 𝑘  

> 10:

if ∥𝒓 𝑘 +1 ∥2 ≤ 𝜀 then  

> 11:

return 𝒙 𝑘 +1 

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

Solve 𝑴𝒛 𝑘 +1 = 𝒓 𝑘 +1 

> 14:

𝛿 𝑘 +1 ← 𝒓 ⊤

> 𝑘 +1

𝒛 𝑘 +1 

> 15:

𝛽 𝑘 ← 𝛿 𝑘 +1/𝛿 𝑘  

> 16:

𝒑 𝑘 +1 ← 𝒛 𝑘 +1 + 𝛽 𝑘 𝒑 𝑘  

> 17:

end for 

The PCG algorithm makes use of basic element-wise arithmetic operations, dot product functionality (to compute 𝒓 𝑇 𝒛 , 𝒑 𝑇 𝒛 , and 

|| 𝒓 𝑘 +1 || 2 on lines 6, 7, 10, and 14 in Algorithm 1), and an sparse matrix-vector product (SpMV) by the matrix 𝑨 (used on lines 1 and 5). For the chosen finite difference approximation, the SpMV operation can be implemented using the 7-point stencil computation outlined in Section 6. 𝑨 is not explicitly stored, but rather hardcoded as the 7 coefficients of the stencil, as discussed below. We first assign the vector 𝒙 to represent a 3D grid of size 𝑁 𝑥 ×

𝑁 𝑦 × 𝑁 𝑧 , such that: 

𝒙 𝒊,𝒋,𝒌 = 𝒙 [𝑖 + 𝑁 𝑥 ( 𝑗 + 𝑁 𝑦 𝑘 )] (1) The matrix-vector product 𝑨𝒙 then computes the following linear combination for each grid point (𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ), given by the finite difference approximation: 

(𝑨𝒙 )𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 = −𝒙 𝑖 −1,𝑗,𝑘 − 𝒙 𝑖,𝑗 −1,𝑘 − 𝒙 𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 −1 + 6 ∗ 𝒙 𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 

− 𝒙 𝑖 +1,𝑗,𝑘 − 𝒙 𝑖,𝑗 +1,𝑘 − 𝒙 𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 +1 (2) using the coefficients for the standard 7-point finite difference Lapla-cian: [-1, -1, -1, 6, -1, -1, -1]. The given vector 𝒃 represents the right-hand side of the linear system, and is distributed to the Tensix cores in the same manner as 𝒙 . To implement this product using our stencil computation, we simply scale relevant tiles before summing them together according to the stencil coefficients. To truly support PCG, we also implement a simple Jacobi pre-conditioner such that 𝑴 = 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔 (𝑨 ). With this preconditioner, the solve in lines 2 and 13 reduces to a simple element-wise scaling of the vector 𝒓 by the constant 1/6. This choice of hardcoding the SpMV and preconditioner is made for simplicity in this proof-of-concept implementation, and future work will explore more general representation and access of sparse matrices. 

7.1 BF16, FP32, and Kernel Fusion 

We implement two variants of the PCG algorithm, one using BF16 and one using FP32. The BF16 implementation uses the FPU for all compute, while the FP32 implementation uses the SFPU (required for this higher precision). In addition, we aimed to explore the impact of kernel fusion, through a more traditional “split-kernel” approach and an aggressively fused approach. The BF16/FPU implementation uses a completely fused kernel, where all operations and all iterations of PCG are implemented in a single kernel. The residual norm is computed and distributed at every iteration, but it remains in SRAM on the device. The kernel fusion has the traditional advantages including reducing launch overhead and also improves performance by needing less data to be staged in circular buffers throughout iterations. The FP32/SFPU implementation uses a split-kernel approach, where each of the three components (element-wise operations, dot product, and SpMV) are implemented in separate kernels. The resid-ual norm is written back to DRAM and then to the host at every iteration. The split-kernel approach more closely matches traditional accelerator programming models, and allows for more straightfor-ward implementation of the algorithm. Additionally, we found the SFPU to be more challenging to program, and the split-kernel ap-proach allowed us to isolate, debug, and profile components more easily. On the other hand, this approach requires more data to be staged in circular buffers, reducing the maximum problem size pos-sible, and incurs more launch overhead. Considering the additional performance cost of using the SFPU, and increased data movement resulting from the switch to FP32, we expect this implementation to perform significantly worse than the BF16/FPU implementation, but align better with traditional HPC needs. 

7.2 Evaluation 

We evaluate the overall performance and scaling of the solver and compare the performance against a reference implementation on an Nvidia H100 GPU. The PCG algorithm can run on any configuration of Tensix cores, allowing us to scale compute resources by varying the size of the Tensix sub-grid used. Although our test system con-tains an n300d, we only evaluate a single Tensix die, wherein the maximum sub-grid size is 8x7, as the remaining cores are allocated to other functionality. The maximum problem size is prescribed by the memory capacity of each core’s local SRAM, which is ap-proximately 1.5MB. After accounting for stack, program storage, and circular buffers, the maximum input size per core for the FP32 split-kernel implementation is 64 tiles of 1024 FP32 elements, and for the BF16 fused-kernel implementation is 164 tiles of 1024 BF16 elements, or equivalently ∼ 3.6 million and ∼ 9.4 million elements respectively. Figure 12 shows strong and weak scaling results for both the FP32 SFPU and BF16 FPU implementations of PCG on the Tenstorrent Wormhole. The FPU scales well, both strongly and weakly, and the SFPU exhibits good weak scaling but slightly more irregular strong scaling. Notably, the SFPU implementation is approximately 2 times slower than the FPU implementation, when normalized against the problem size, due to the increased cost of the SFPU operations. 10 • Taylor et al.                     

> 16 22 32 42 56
> .8
> 1.2
> 1.6
> 2.2
> 3.2
> number of cores
> time/iter (ms)
> ideal
> measured
> (a) Strong scaling of the FP32 implementation with fixed problem size of 64x16 tiles to maximize problem size at the smallest core count of 4x4 cores.
> 4816 32 64
> .1
> .2
> .4
> .8
> 1.6
> 3.2
> number of cores
> time/iter (ms)
> ideal
> measured
> (b) Strong scaling of the BF16 implementation with fixed problem size of 164x4 tiles (671,744 elements of 𝑥 ), to maximize problem size at 2x2 cores.
> 010 20 30 40 50 60
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5·10 −2
> number of cores
> time/iter per tile (ms)
> FP32
> BF16
> ideal
> (c) Weak scaling at max problem size for FP32 (64 tiles, or 167,936 elements of 𝑥 per core) and BF16 (164 tiles, or 671,744 elements of 𝑥 per core), normalized per tile.

Fig. 12. Scaling results for the CG solve on Tenstorrent Wormhole. Results are produced via host-side timing of the entire solve, averaged over 100 iterations. 

h100 wormhole 

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

> time/iter (ms)

spmv axpy dotprod 

Fig. 13. Breakdown of H100 and Wormhole BF16 performance. Kernel launch and other overheads are not included. 

7.3 Comparison with Nvidia H100 GPU 

Table 2 summarizes some high-level architectural characteristics of the Tenstorrent wormhole PCIe accelerator and several other HPC accelerators. These features are presented to help contextualize the comparison against the H100 results in this section. Table 3 shows a performance comparison between both the BF16 and FP32 Wormhole implementations and a CG solve implemented for a GPU. At the maximum problem size, the BF16 and FP32 imple-mentations are approximately 7 and 16 times slower than the H100 GPU respectively. Here it is important to note that because we are only utilizing one Tensix die of the n300d, the specs of the n150d are more relevant for comparison, especially in terms of TDP, and the performance differential should be considered relative to power draw. The Wormhole has a smaller TDP and is manufactured at a larger process node than the H100. Future work will explore full utilization of the n300d and the performance per watt relative to the H100, instead of using TDP as a proxy. Figure 13 breaks down the time spent in each component of the PCG algorithm for both the H100 and Wormhole implementations. The H100 (Tab. 2) results were gathered under gcc 13.3.0, CUDA 12.8.1, and Kokkos 4.6.2. The GPU implementation follows a tra-ditional programming style, where the CG is assembled from four individual kernels: norm , dot , axpy , and SpMV . Rather than a custom structured SpMV kernel, it leverages Nvidia’s cuSPARSE sparse lin-ear algebra library. cuSPARSE does not provide a structured matrix Numerical Kernels on a Spatial Accelerator: A Study of Tenstorrent Wormhole • 11                                        

> Specification Wormhole n150d Wormhole n300d H100
> Vendor Tenstorrent Tenstorrent Nvidia Form Factor PCIe PCIe PCIe TDP (W) 160 300 350 Manufacturing Node GF 12nm GF 12nm TSMC N4 Peak Memory BW (GB/s) 288 576 3,900 Memory 12 GB GDDR6 24 GB GDDR6 80 GB HBM3
> Compute Performance (TFLOPS)
> FP8 262 466 1,513 FP16 74 131 102.4 FP32 2.3 4.1 51.2
> Table 2. High-level architectural characteristics of the Tenstorrent Wormhole n300d PCIe accelerators, Nvidia H100 GPU, and AMD MI300A APU. The n150d is provided for reference, as it is a single-die version of the n300d. Our experiments were carried out on one Tensix die of an n300d.
> Implementation Time/Iteration (ms)
> H100 0.28 Wormhole BF16 1.20 Wormhole FP32 2.45
> Table 3. H100 and Wormhole performance comparison for PCG for 512 ×
> 112 ×64 grid. The Wormhole implementations are evaluated on an 8x7 grid of Tensix cores with 64 tiles per core.

format, so the structure was realized via the Sliced ELL format, gener-ally recognized as state-of-the-art in performance for matrices with limited row-length variability. All real values are 32-bit IEEE-754. Many HPC algorithms benefit from even higher precision, but 32-bit precision is selected for comparison to Wormhole. The norm , dot ,

axpy kernels are implemented via the Kokkos programming system in a naive, straightforward way. The subcomponent times are mea-sured by wrapping the relevant operations in cudaEventRecord 

calls, followed by calls to cudaEventSynchronize and cudaEvent-ElapsedTime . Due to the implementation of dot via Kokkos’ paral-lel_reduce , the dot time includes transferring the residual norm back to the host. On Wormhole, these component times were collected using de-vice side profiling via Tracy. Unlike the H100, they only add up to approximately half of the measured per-iteration time in Tab. 3, since these subcomponent times do not include transferring the residual norm back to the host, or kernel launch overheads, both of which may be more expensive than on H100. We also observed substantial execution gaps in the Tracy trace between what should be immediately-subsequent kernels on the n300d, though it’s not clear whether that is a profiling artifact or not. Relative to the H100, the axpy kernel is the least expensive, as it requires no commu-nication and very little computation. Although Fig. 13 suggests that SpMV and dot maintain their relative equality in time con-sumed vs the H100, since the dot on Wormhole does not include the device-to-host transfer, it is actually relatively more expensive on the Wormhole. This may be due to global communication twice per iteration. Relative to the other two, SpMV is computationally heavy, featuring transposes, copies, and additions. As demonstrated in Fig-ure 11, the halo exchange in SpMV does not contribute significantly to the kernels cost. 

8 Future Work 

The implementations presented are limited by the 16-bit precision of the FPU and lower-throughput 32-bit precision of the SFPU. Many HPC problems require 64-bit precision, which is not supported on Wormhole. Furthermore, while this paper provided rough TDP comparisons to contextualize performance results, a comprehensive power consumption analysis would strengthen the case for spatial architectures in HPC contexts. Wormhole provides limited facilities for detailed power monitoring, however system-level consumption and energy-to-solution could be measured relatively accurately and would be a useful addition to future work. In terms of methodology and Wormhole-specific optimizations, future work should explore multi-device scaling and more general sparse matrix representations. The latter is a particularly important step towards generalized HPC support on dataflow architectures like Wormhole. As architectures like Wormhole mature, it will be important to explore how support for general numerical methods evolves. Extending this work to additional numerical methods such as multigrid solvers, FFTs and irregular graph algorithms would help es-tablish the broader applicability of spatial architectures for scientific computing and identify common optimization patterns that could inform higher-level programming abstractions. The complexity of implementation on Wormhole highlights the need for improved programming models that can abstract architecture-specific details while maintaining performance. Developing or adapting domain-specific languages or compiler techniques in high-performance computing could significantly improve the accessibility of these architectures to the broader community and is an active area of research. 

9 Conclusion 

In this work, we have presented implementations of three numerical kernels as well as two implementations of the precondition conju-gate gradient (PCG) method using a seven-point finite difference 12 • Taylor et al. 

stencil. We have shown implementation details important to achieve a successful mapping of numerical algorithms to the Wormhole ar-chitecture and have detailed concerns regarding data distribution, local and global collectives, memory access patterns, and kernel fusion. Our implementation represents the most complex numerical algorithm successfully deployed on Wormhole to date, incorporat-ing architecture-specific optimizations tailored for sparse numerical computations. The key achievements of this work include: 

• Successfully extending the computational complexity bound-ary of an implementation on the Wormhole accelerator be-yond traditional neural network workloads. 

• Providing performance insights indicating that HPC-relevant algorithms can be mapped to Wormhole. While spatial architectures like Wormhole show promise for nu-merical computing, significant challenges remain in terms of pro-grammability and generalization. The explicit management of data movement and parallelization, while enabling high performance for regular workloads, presents substantial complexity for irregular algorithms. Nevertheless, this work provides a foundational demon-stration of traditional HPC algorithms on emerging AI-accelerator architectures. 

References 

[1] 754_WG - Working Group for Floating-Point Arithmetic. IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic, 2019. [2] Nick Brown and Ryan Barton. Accelerating stencils on the Tenstorrent Grayskull RISC-V accelerator. In SC24-W: Workshops of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pages 1690– 1700. IEEE, 2024. [3] Johannes de Fine Licht, Andreas Kuster, Tiziano De Matteis, Tal Ben-Nun, Dominic Hofer, and Torsten Hoefler. Stencilflow: Mapping large stencil programs to dis-tributed spatial computing systems. In 2021 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO), pages 315–326. IEEE, 2021. [4] Matthew Stephen Doerner. An analysis of machine learning hardware from tenstorrent. 2024. [5] Axel Feldmann, Courtney Golden, Yifan Yang, Joel S. Emer, and Daniel Sanchez. Azul: An accelerator for sparse iterative solvers leveraging distributed on-chip memory. In 2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 643–656, 2024. [6] Jean-Michel Muller, Nicolas Brisebarre, Florent De Dinechin, Claude-Pierre Jean-nerod, Vincent Lefevre, Guillaume Melquiond, Nathalie Revol, Damien Stehlé, Serge Torres, et al. Handbook of floating-point arithmetic, volume 1. Springer, 2018. [7] Kamil Rocki, Dirk Van Essendelft, Ilya Sharapov, Robert Schreiber, Michael Morri-son, Vladimir Kibardin, Andrey Portnoy, Jean Francois Dietiker, Madhava Syamlal, and Michael James. Fast stencil-code computation on a wafer-scale processor, 2020. [8] Ryuichi Sai, François P Hamon, John Mellor-Crummey, and Mauricio Araya-Polo. Matrix-free finite volume kernels on a dataflow architecture. In SC24: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pages 1–11. IEEE, 2024. [9] Ryuichi Sai, John Mellor-Crummey, Jinfan Xu, and Mauricio Araya-Polo. Au-tomated code generation of high-order stencils for a dataflow architecture. In SC24: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pages 1–13, 2024. [10] Kylee Santos, Stan Moore, Tomas Oppelstrup, Amirali Sharifian, Ilya Sharapov, Aidan Thompson, Delyan Z Kalchev, Danny Perez, Robert Schreiber, Scott Pakin, et al. Breaking the molecular dynamics timescale barrier using a wafer-scale system. In SC24: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pages 1–13. IEEE, 2024. [11] Louis Schnyder. 2d collective communication for the cerebras wafer-scale engine. B.S. thesis, ETH Zurich, 2024. [12] Bartosz Taudul. Tracy profiler. https://github.com/wolfpld/tracy.git, 2025. Ac-cessed: 2025-08-28. [13] K. Thiruvenkadam, J. Ramesh, and A.S. Pillai. Area-efficient dual-mode fused floating-point three-term adder. Circuits Systems and Signal Processing, 38:173– 190, 2019. [14] John Tramm, Bryce Allen, Kazutomo Yoshii, Andrew Siegel, and Leighton Wilson. Efficient algorithms for monte carlo particle transport on ai accelerator hardware. Computer Physics Communications, 298:109072, 2024. [15] Son Dao Trong, Eric M. Schwarz, and Martin Schmookler. Hardware Implemen-tations of Denormalized Numbers . In Proceedings. 16th IEEE Symposium on Computer Arithmetic, page 70. IEEE Computer Society, 2003. [16] Dirk Van Essendelft, Patrick Wingo, Terry Jordan, Ryan Smith, and Wissam Saidi. A system level compiler for massively-parallel, spatial, dataflow architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15875, 2025. [17] Mino Woo, Terry Jordan, Robert Schreiber, Ilya Sharapov, Shaheer Muhammad, Abhishek Koneru, Michael James, and Dirk Van Essendelft. Disruptive changes in field equation modeling: A simple interface for wafer scale engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.13768, 2022.