Title: KernelBlaster: Continual Cross-Task CUDA Optimization via Memory-Augmented In-Context Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.14293v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Feb 2026 03:03:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# KERNEL BLASTER : C ONTINUAL CROSS -T ASK CUDA O PTIMIZATION VIA 

# MEMORY -A UGMENTED IN-C ONTEXT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 

Kris Shengjun Dong 1,2,∗, Sahil Modi 1, Dima Nikiforov 2, Sana Damani 1,Edward Lin 1, Siva Kumar Sastry Hari 1, Christos Kozyrakis 11NVIDIA, 2University of California, Berkeley 

## ABSTRACT 

Optimizing CUDA code across multiple generations of GPU architectures is challenging, as achieving peak performance requires an extensive exploration of an increasingly complex, hardware-specific optimization space. Traditional compilers are constrained by fixed heuristics, whereas finetuning Large Language Models (LLMs) can be expensive. However, agentic workflows for CUDA code optimization have limited ability to aggregate knowl-edge from prior exploration, leading to biased sampling and suboptimal solutions. We propose KERNEL BLASTER ,a Memory-Augmented In-context Reinforcement Learning (MAIC-RL) framework designed to improve CUDA optimization search capabilities of LLM-based GPU coding agents. K ERNEL BLASTER enables agents to learn from experience and make systematically informed decisions on future tasks by accumulating knowledge into a retrievable Persistent CUDA Knowledge Base . We propose a novel profile-guided, textual-gradient-based agentic flow for CUDA generation and optimization to achieve high performance across generations of GPU architec-tures. K ERNEL BLASTER guides LLM agents to systematically explore high-potential optimization strategies beyond naive rewrites. Compared to the PyTorch baseline, our method achieves geometric mean speedups of 1.43 ×, 2.50 ×, and 1.50 × on KernelBench Levels 1, 2, and 3, respectively. We release K ERNEL BLASTER as an open-source agentic framework, accompanied by a test harness, verification components, and a reproducible evaluation pipeline †.

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

As machine learning workloads evolve, emerging model architectures and increasingly dynamic workloads intro-duce new execution patterns that invalidate previously tuned kernels, posing new challenges to existing software stacks (Sevilla et al., 2022). To sustain high performance under this shifting landscape, systems must continually adapt their optimization strategies. Achieving state-of-the-art efficiency increasingly depends on maintaining and extending special-ized kernel libraries tuned for new operator patterns and hardware targets. This process has traditionally required substantial engineering effort and deep domain expertise. As frontier models rapidly evolve, this optimization pro-cess becomes a scalability bottleneck, preventing full usage of emerging hardware capabilities and limiting achievable performance(Sevilla et al., 2022). The rapid evolution of hardware exposes the limitations of manual kernel implementation tuning. One example is FlashAttention: when FlashAttention-2 (Dao, 2023) was ini-tially ported to NVIDIA’s H100 GPUs (NVIDIA, 2022), per-formance dropped by roughly 47%, reflecting mismatches 

> *Most of this work was done by Kris Shengjun Dong during her 2025 summer internship at NVIDIA.

between prior optimizations and the new architecture. Only after a redesign effort did FlashAttention-3 (Shah et al., 2024) introduce architecture-aware optimizations that re-covered and exceeded prior efficiency. Another example is DeepSeek-V3, which particularly targets NVIDIA H800 GPUs (NVIDIA, 2023), with training pipelines and com-munication schedules designed around that platform’s exe-cution model, including FP8 computation and cluster-level data movement (DeepSeek-AI, 2025). These optimizations assume specific hardware characteristics and cluster topol-ogy, and transferring them to other GPU variants requires them to be redesigned. As hardware and workload charac-teristics evolve, platform-specific tuning can quickly lose relevance, motivating optimization approaches that adapt across hardware generations instead of relying on fixed, device-specific engineering. This manual optimization pipeline increasingly becomes a scalability bottleneck, limiting how quickly software can exploit new hardware capabilities and pushing against prac-tical performance ceilings. As a consequence, a research domain has recently emerged to investigate LLMs’ capabili-ties for GPU code generation and optimization (Gim et al., 2025; Lin et al., 2025; Sharma, 2025; Baronio et al., 2025a; Cummins et al., 2025; Damani et al., 2024; Taneja et al., 

> arXiv:2602.14293v1 [cs.LG] 15 Feb 2026

2025). Initial studies have highlighted the potential for using LLMs to enhance GPU program performance (Peng et al., 2025; Gong et al., 2025; Lange et al., 2025). However, there remain substantial opportunities to improve generalizabil-ity, learning capability, sample efficiency, and cost when applying LLMs code optimization. We present KERNEL BLASTER , a novel Memory-Augmented In-context Reinforcement Learning (MAIC-RL) framework designed to automate the task of CUDA code optimization. KERNEL BLASTER leverages ICRL techniques to build a Persistent CUDA Knowledge Base 

(“ Knowledge Base ”) to allow LLM agents to learn and ap-ply code-optimization policies from experience. Figure 1 shows the high-level agentic system. Our primary contributions are: 1. In-Context Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) Frame-work for CUDA Optimizations: We formulate the CUDA code optimization problem as a reinforcement learning problem with textual gradient updates, cap-turing rich semantic information from profile data and enabling inference-time learning, enabling faster and more directed learning compared to prior RL method-ologies that directly update model weights. 2. A Comprehensive Knowledge Base : We aggregate ex-perience from past optimization attempts into a Knowl-edge Base data structure, enabling efficient traversal of optimization candidates compared to prior static solu-tions. We propose a novel hierarchical representation that categorizes code instances into performance states, resulting in a scalable representation that efficiently utilizes model context. 3. A Framework for Long-Term Cross-Task Learn-ing: KERNEL BLASTER simultaneously generates opti-mized kernels while also aggregating knowledge across problems, generating a re-usable artifact that enables faster convergence on new problems and GPU hard-ware platforms. This artifact is designed for adapt-ability and can be specialized for distinct application domains and specific GPU architectures (e.g., NVIDIA Ampere vs. Hopper), enabling the agent to apply accu-mulated experience effectively to future unseen prob-lems. 4. An Open-Source Textual RL Framework : We will release an open-source implementation of our textu-ral RL agentic workflow, including baseline CUDA kernels, initialized databases, and test harnesses. †

Our experiments show that K ERNEL BLASTER guides LLM agents to systematically explore high-potential optimization strategies beyond naive rewrites across architectures, result-ing in a geometric mean performance speedup of 1.43 × 

> †The repository will be released in a subsequent revision.
> Figure 1. High-level block diagram of the K ERNEL BLASTER
> agentic workflow.

over the PyTorch baseline on KernelBench Level 1, 2.50 ×

on complex operator compositions in KernelBench Level 2 and 2.50 × when accelerating entire models in KernelBench Level 3. 

## 2 RELATED WORK 

Existing agentic systems for CUDA optimization can be broadly categorized into training-based methods, static prompt engineering approaches, search-based frameworks, memory-augmented systems, and in-context reinforcement learning techniques. While these approaches have demon-strated the potential of LLM-driven kernel optimization, they vary significantly in adaptability, sample efficiency, cost range, and cross-task generalization. 

Training-Based Solutions: The mainstream solution of specializing LLMs for CUDA optimization is via retraining or fine-tuning the models themselves. Examples include the Kevin32B Multi-Turn RL solution for kernel generation (Ba-ronio et al., 2025b), which uses an iterative feedback loop to generate kernels, calculates a reward, and then uses learned experience and feedback to train the model. Works such as CUDA-L1 extend upon RL training methods by also storing and retrieving a record of past solutions (Li et al., 2025). While these are promising approaches that learn from ex-perience and do not require manual prompt engineering, training a model is often an expensive task and potentially impossible in the case of closed-weight models. 

Static Prompt Engineering Solutions: Early agentic sys-tems for CUDA optimization rely on fixed prompts aug-mented with manually engineered heuristics. These ap-proaches require substantial effort and domain expertise to construct effective prompts (Opsahl-Ong et al., 2024; Damani et al., 2024). While they demonstrate that LLMs can assist in code optimization, their primary limitation is the inability to learn from experience. The prompt re-mains unchanged regardless of prior outcomes, often lead-2Figure 2. Taxonomy of Agentic Flows for LLM-Driven Code Optimization. 

ing agents to repeat similar transformations and converge to locally optimal but globally suboptimal solutions (Ouyang et al., 2025b). Moreover, adapting to new GPU architectures or specialized domains frequently necessitates additional manual prompt design, particularly in low-resource settings where optimization heuristics are difficult to generalize. Several systems industrialize this idea via explicit multi-agent workflows. CudaForge, for instance, pairs a Coder and a Judge agent and uses hardware feedback (e.g., pro-filer metrics) to guide iterative refinement (Zhang et al., 2025). However, the overall optimization behavior is still largely dictated by an engineered workflow specification rather than an experience-driven policy that improves across tasks, which constrains adaptability as kernels, domains, and architectures shift. Finally, systems such as KernelFalcon operate over higher-level kernel languages (e.g., Triton) to preserve framework semantics while generating optimized kernels (Wang et al., 2025b). Although these methods ben-efit from higher-level abstractions and toolchains, but that abstraction can limit the degree of low-level control and fine-grained hardware visibility in low-level CUDA opti-mization. Besides, they depend on compiler infrastructures, which limit the adaptivity to other systems. 

Search-Based Solutions: More recent systems move be-yond static prompting toward dynamic, search-driven opti-mization. Search-based systems generate candidate kernel variants and leverage iterative sampling and evaluation to select high-performing variants within a single optimization task (Chen et al., 2025). Beam search techniques improve the search efficiency relative to exhaustive enumeration by pruning weak trajectories (Hong et al., 2025). These sys-tems enhance agents’ exploration efficiency by performing a broader search than relying on a fixed heuristic. Despite these advances, the primary limitation of search-based methods is that optimization remains largely kernel-local: each new kernel triggers a fresh, resource-intensive search, and the system typically does not retain or reuse lessons learned from prior kernels (Chen et al., 2025). In practice, many search procedures require extensive sampling to discover high-performing variants (Hong et al., 2025). Because they do not track long-term memory (each kernel optimization is treated independently), the agent must redis-cover effective strategies for every new task from a default initial state (Chen et al., 2025). This results in excessive samples required to rediscover high-performing strategies, and limits optimization decisions to those originally enu-merated in the search space. 

Iterative Refinement on Prompting Policy: Prompt-policy refinement treats prompts as mutable parameters and improves them using downstream metrics without weight updates. MIPRO optimizes free-form instructions and few-shot demonstrations across multi-stage language-model pro-grams under a black-box objective (no module-level labels or gradients), and reports accuracy gains up to 13% over baselines on several programs (Opsahl-Ong et al., 2024). GEPA extends this direction with reflective prompt evolu-tion and Pareto-based selection: it analyzes rollout traces, proposes and tests prompt mutations, and achieves large quality gains with far fewer rollouts than weight-space RL, including reported benefits as an inference-time search strat-egy for code optimization (Agrawal et al., 2025). These optimizers reduce manual prompt engineering, but they typ-ically require re-optimization when the task distribution, tools, or constraints (e.g., new hardware targets) change. Compared to training-based and search-based solutions, which require significant samples for updating weights, directly updating prompts is significantly more sample-efficient. However, the benefits of GEPA mainly apply to a single task being optimized; although such systems can refine a particular prompt, this process needs to be repeated from scratch for new tasks, limiting generalization from a single training run. In particular, this limitation is due to storing knowledge directly in a series of prompt candidates. This prevents additional knowledge that can be used for fur-ther prompt refinement, which is not directly usable during task execution. 3Memory-Augmented Solutions: A more sophisticated line of work incorporates long-term memory to learn from experience across multiple tasks to guide future decisions. The AI CUDA Engineer implemented this idea in a staged pipeline to archive correctness-verified kernels and perfor-mance data to seed embedding-based retrieval (Lange et al., 2025). KernelEvolve maintains a hierarchical knowledge base of past kernels with runtime-conditioned search (Liao et al., 2025). While these methods represent a significant step forward, their effectiveness depends on what is retained and how re-trieval is targeted. Most work leverages explicit knowledge distillation. For example, AI CUDA Engineer’s released archive focuses on verified kernels and uses embedding-based retrieval to select in-context exemplars, while Ker-nelEvolve explicitly uses runtime-conditioned retrieval and a structured knowledge-base hierarchy to avoid irrelevant context and preserve context-window efficiency (Lange et al., 2025; Liao et al., 2025). More generally, many memory-augmented approaches still rely on the LLM to infer transferable optimization principles from retrieved ar-tifacts at inference time, leaving open the question of how to represent and retrieve bottleneck-level knowledge that transfers across kernels whose surface structure differs. 

Evolutionary Algorithms. Evolutionary coding agents maintain a population of candidate programs and iteratively improve them using LLM-driven variation operators and evaluator feedback (tests, metrics, or verifiers). Compared to memory-based solutions that explicitly store learnings in a separate data structure, evolutionary approaches implicitly store a past history by curating a population of candidate solutions. AlphaEvolve implements this pattern with an explicit evolutionary loop: sampled “parent” programs and inspirations are drawn from a program database to build rich prompts; proposed code differences are evaluated by task-specific evaluators; and promising solutions are added back into the database to drive iterative improvement (Novikov et al., 2025). CodeEvolve provides an open-source real-ization of this design space, coupling an islands-based ge-netic algorithm with modular LLM orchestration and selec-tion guided by execution feedback and task-specific met-rics (Assump c¸ ˜ ao et al., 2025). OpenEvolve extends MAP-Elites-style quality-diversity evolution with an explicit pro-gram database and an artifact side-channel that propagates execution errors and diagnostics into later generations, re-ducing repeated failure modes during exploration (Sharma, 2025). Storing full code artifacts (e.g., OpenEvolve-style program archives) can incur nontrivial storage overhead and in-flate the amount of context needed to condition generation (Sharma, 2025; Lange et al., 2025). Moreover, because these systems often emphasize retaining and sampling high-performing elites, negative outcomes (e.g., slowdowns) may be less systematically represented than they could be for learning robust optimization principles. Finally, retrieval policies are commonly driven by stored metadata or sim-ilarity signals, which can miss opportunities to transfer bottleneck-level insights across kernels whose surface forms differ. While these methods support broad exploration and strategy diversity, their cost scales with evaluator throughput and the robustness of correctness and performance measurement under noisy runtime conditions. Another recent work, Evo-Engineer, partitions its memory into solution techniques and population management to handle performant and under-performing approaches (Guo et al., 2025). However, this approach does not manage long-term memory; instead man-aging per-problem data structures, which do not exploit cross-problem learning. 

Semantic Learning via Textual Gradient Decent A sig-nificant milestone in enabling learning in agentic systems is to model updates to prompts as approximations of gra-dients in a textual/semantic space. Instead of applying gra-dients during backpropagation to model weights, semantic feedback can be propagated back to system prompts using natural language, approximating numerical gradients. This concept, introduced by TextGrad (Yao et al., 2024), enables significantly faster traversal over the parameter space, as natural language feedback contains far denser feedback sig-nals compared to numerical updates. However, TextGrad has not been applied to code optimization domains, which require nuanced hardware-aware feedback. Furthermore, although TextGrad provides a method for textual gradient approximation, it leaves the methodologies of building agen-tic learning systems that utilize this methodology as an open problem (Yao et al., 2024). 

In-Context Reinforcement Learning (ICRL): As agen-tic systems evolved beyond static prompts and search-based methodologies, solutions diverged into memory-augmented methods and learning-based methods. However, both meth-ods are limited by their drawbacks: memory-augmented methods reach scalability bottlenecks, and prior learning-based approaches specialize in particular problems rather than cross-task learning. This paper introduces the emerging field of ICRL to CUDA code optimization. ICRL addresses these bottlenecks by enabling reinforcement learning at in-ference time : the agent conditions on past interactions (i.e., a latent space of states, actions, and rewards) and adapts its behavior without changing any model parameters . All adap-tation happens in the forward pass by reasoning over the provided history, treating the recent transcript as working memory to infer the task and perform exploration, credit assignment, and policy improvement purely through context 4processing (Monea et al., 2025). Mechanically, the context is a structured log of (st, a t, r t) tuples, goals, and episode rollouts. The agent parses this history to (i) infer task struc-ture and reward-relevant features, (ii) balance exploration versus exploitation, and (iii) attribute credit by connecting delayed rewards to earlier choices. Lightweight tools such as tables, advantage summaries, natural-language rationales, and rolling statistics can make this explicit, synergizing with policy iteration in context (Brooks et al., 2023; Demircan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025a). 

## 3 METHODOLOGY 

To address the limitations mentioned above in section 2, KERNEL BLASTER leverages ICRL, combining the benefits of dynamic search and learning from experience without requiring model training. K ERNEL BLASTER learns from both successes and failures across different optimization problems and can discover both individual optimizations and implicitly encode probabilistic sequences of optimiza-tions via sequences of state transitions. Additionally, we propose a compact, domain-specific long-term memory data structure to store, update, and retrieve distilled knowledge accumulated from previous attempts. K ERNEL BLASTER ’ability to consolidate learnings across multiple optimization attempts enables more efficient GPU resource utilization and faster code execution compared to conventional GPU code optimization systems.  

> Figure 3. Conceptual Model of Memory-Augmented In-context Reinforcement Learning (MAIC-RL) Across Tasks and Time.

Figure 3 provides a conceptual visualization of how K ER -

> NEL

BLASTER accumulates experience and generalizes knowledge across different optimization tasks over time. The framework operates across three dimensions: State, rep-resenting the performance signature of a given CUDA kernel (e.g., memory-bound, compute-bound, etc.); Time, repre-senting the progression of optimization attempts; and Task, representing distinct and unrelated optimization problems. As the agent undertakes a series of tasks (Task 0 through Task N), it generates optimization trajectories, or past roll-outs, on the State-Time plane for each task. Each point on these trajectories corresponds to an optimization attempt and its measured actual performance. This empirical data is continuously distilled and integrated into the central Knowl-edge Base , represented by the upward arrows. The Knowledge Base , acting as the agent’s long-term mem-ory and policy, aggregates the learned knowledge. When faced with a new, unseen task, the agent queries the Knowl-edge Base (downward arrow) to generate future rollouts. These future attempts are guided by predicted performance values derived from accumulated experience across past tasks. This process illustrates the system’s core capability: it does not solve each problem in isolation but learns gener-alizable optimization principles that allow it to make more informed, efficient decisions on future, unseen problems.   

> Figure 4. Knowledge Base Construction.

Our agentic workflow, shown in Figure 6, consists of the following components. • A Persistent CUDA Knowledge Base that stores entries of the form ⟨state , ⟨optimization , score ⟩⟩ .• An LLM-powered State Extractor that derives a perfor-mance signature from runtime profiling information. • A State Selector that retrieves relevant 

(state , optimization ) pairs from the Knowledge Base .• An Optimization Selector that identifies candidate transformations and performs a weighted search to select the top-k optimizations for sampling. • A Lowering Agent that implements and validates the selected optimization. • A Policy Evaluation module that analyzes the perfor-mance of the generated code and updates the Knowl-edge Base accordingly. For each new task, we first extract program state from the input program code based on performance characteristics. 5Figure 5. A sample of the Knowledge Base data structure, specify-ing discovered states. 

We provide an example of states within the Knowledge Base 

in Figure 5. Next, the state-matcher analyzes the perfor-mance and code signatures of a kernel and classifies it as a known or discovered state; this comparison uses the per-formance information for every executed kernels from the “Details” section of an Nsight Compute (NCU) report, and compares it against the previously documented primary and secondary bottlenecks of the selected performance state. If it is a discovered state, the agent appends the new state to the Knowledge Base . Otherwise, it uses the state as the key to retrieve a set of candidate optimizations from the 

Knowledge Base . If no optimizations exist yet, it proposes and adds a new set of candidate optimizations to the state in the Knowledge Base . From the set of candidate optimiza-tions, the optimization selection agent performs a random weighted selection based on predicted performance gain from the Knowledge Base to select the top-k optimizations. The random search ensures that the agent does not always se-lect the best past performer and explores new optimizations. Next, we iteratively explore each of the chosen optimiza-tions by applying them to the initial program and testing and profiling to ensure correctness and performance. Further-more, this process implicitly discovers successful sequences of optimizations, as different optimization candidates are discovered as the program instances traverse performance states. Finally, we update the Knowledge Base with the performance feedback of the optimized kernel. Our ICRL algorithm is depicted in Algorithm 2. Our ap-proach adapts Algorithm 1. REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), a foundational policy-gradient approach in reinforcement learning, to in-context learning. Fundamentally, instead of applying a policy gradient to a set of model parame-ters, we instead treat the prompt to an LLM-agent as our mutable model parameters, θ. In this case, θ is a Knowl-edge Base consisting of a set of performance optimization strategies coupled with their expected performance gains. We propose a novel approach in which, instead of directly back-propagating the loss function through the policy to compute the gradient, we use an LLM agent to reason about the policy’s performance discrepancy on new samples. We approximate the policy gradient with two agents, Poli-cyEvaluation and PerfGapAnalysis , as depicted in Figure 6. After we collect new samples (consisting of tuples of optimized code, optimization actions, and profil-ing metrics) into a replay buffer, PolicyEvaluation 

compares the achieved performance of optimizations com-pared to their expected behavior, and summarizes the key differences in natural language. PerfGapAnalysis then reasons about why the performance results differ and what assumptions were incorrect. Next, we approximate policy update by integrating these changes into the Knowledge Base , using another agent, ParameterUpdate . Figure 6 shows this process in greater detail. Essentially, by leveraging LLM agents, we can extract dense performance information in natural language and perform significant analysis during each gradient approximation up-date. The reward rt for a sample will include both high-level performance gains, as well as low-level performance breakdowns from GPU profiling tooling. Furthermore, by integrating a reinforcement-learning-based approach, we ensure that subsequent optimizations are informed by real profiling metrics rather than the priors used to generate the initial prompt, θ0.

## 4 EVALUATION 

We evaluate four representative optimization systems: Our KERNEL BLASTER , the AI CUDA Engineer, Kernelsseum (Ouyang et al., 2024), and the IREE compiler (IREE, 2019) across diverse GPU architectures and benchmark levels. The overall configuration, including used models, hardware tar-gets, datasets, initialization methods, and evaluation metrics, is summarized in Table 2. The comparison of compiler-and agent-driven optimization pipelines is under equivalent execution and profiling conditions. 

4.1 Evaluation Setup 

We evaluate K ERNEL BLASTER against a suite of represen-tative optimization systems, including compiler and agent-based solutions, across diverse GPU architectures and bench-mark levels. To ensure a fair comparison, we provide a table with a comprehensive summary of the evaluation configura-tion provided in Table 2. For our results and IREE, we use the sum of elapsed cycles of all kernels using the NCU pro-6Figure 6. Architectural Diagram of K ERNEL BLASTER . The sub-diagram on the left demonstrates the outer loop of the ICRL Process: at

denotes the optimizations generated by the K ERNEL BLASTER ’s MAIC-RL policy, st denotes unoptimized code prior to at, and st+1 

represents the optimized code after at is applied to state st. The sub-diagram on the right demonstrates the inner loop of K ERNEL BLASTER ,which runs a single optimization rollout. 

Algorithm 1. REINFORCE 

1: Input: Initial policy params θ0, env. E, policy πθ

2: Initialize replay buffer D ← ∅ 

3: for iteration k = 0 , 1, 2, . . . do 

4: Sample initial state s0 ∼ E 

5: Initialize trajectory τ ← [] 

6: s ← s0

7: for step t = 0 to T do 

8: Sample action at ∼ πθk (at | st)

9: Append (st, a t) to trajectory τ

10: Set st+1 ← EnvStep (st, a t)

11: Set rt = R(st, a t)

12: end for 

13: Evaluate return R(τ ) = P 

> t

rt

14: Store (τ, R (τ )) in buffer D

15: Estimate policy gradient: 16: ∇θ J(θk ) ← 1

> |D|

P

> (τ,R )

P 

> t

∇θ log πθ (at | st)R(τ )

17: Update policy: θk+1 ← θk + α∇θ J(θk )

18: end for 

Algorithm 2. LLM-Based Policy Opt. via Strategy-Guided Rollouts 

1: Input: Initial Knowledge Base θ0, env. E, LLM policy πθ

2: Initialize replay buffer D ← ∅ 

3: for iteration k = 0 , 1, 2, . . . do 

4: Sample code task s0 ∼ E ▷ Initial code 5: Initialize rollout trajectory τ ← [] 

6: s ← s0

7: for step t = 0 to T do 

8: Generate optimized code at ∼ πθk (at | st)

9: Append (st, a t) to trajectory τ

10: Set st+1 ← at ▷ Set new code as state 11: Set rt = R(st+1 ) ▷ Profile-based reward 12: end for 

13: Evaluate total reward R(τ )

14: Store (τ, R (τ )) in buffer D

15: gk ← PolicyEvaluation (D, θ k )

16: pk ← PerfGapAnalysis (gk )

17: θk+1 ← ParameterUpdate (θk , p k )

18: end for 

filer for both optimized kernels and the PyTorch baselines. For AI CUDA Engineer, we use the test harness provided with the released kernels, which uses application-level tim-ing for both optimized kernels and PyTorch. Our method is compared against several baselines: PyTorch’s default eager execution mode; torch.compile , a JIT compiler inte-grated into PyTorch (PyTorch Team, 2025); the IREE ML compiler (IREE, 2019); The primary agentic comparison is against the AI CUDA Engineer, a state-of-the-art solution in CUDA code generation. 

4.2 Evaluation Metrics 

The target metrics include kernel performance and system performance. The efficacy of each optimization system is assessed using a comprehensive set of metrics that capture both the performance of the generated code and the effi-ciency of the optimization process. Code performance is the primary focus, quantified by the speedup achieved over established baselines, including the original PyTorch imple-mentation and related work. We defined Valid Rate as the percentage of optimization problems that successfully pass both functionality and LLM-based soft verification checks. Baseline (1.0x) is measured as the best performance among PyTorch Eager and torch.compile . To provide a holis-tic view of performance improvements, the mean speedup across all successful runs is reported with baseline (1.0x) measured as the best performance among PyTorch Eager and torch.compile .Given that comparison groups may generate the same num-ber of correct kernels at different rates, inducing different system costs. We evaluate the fast p metric to characterize the distribution of high-impact optimizations. fast p is de-fined the percentage of kernels that are at least r times faster than the baseline within k attempts (Ouyang et al., 2024), which defines as the fraction of tasks that both produce cor-rect outputs and achieve a speedup—defined as the ratio of 7Table 1. Comparison of Classical Policy Gradient and the In-Context K ERNEL BLASTER Approach 

Component In-Context K ERNEL BLASTER 

Analogue Policy ( πθ (at|st)) An LLM agent ( π) that, given state st, generates a distribution of optimized code ( at) based on its context ( θ). 

State ( st) The unoptimized code prior to ap-plying an optimization. 

Action ( at) The optimizations generated by LLM. 

Next State ( st+1 ) The optimized code after action 

at is applied to state st.

Reward ( R) The reward is a function of the discrepancy between predicted performance and actual perfor-mance, where actual performance is measured from running the fi-nal generated code on the GPU. 

Parameters ( θ) The natural language context (the 

Knowledge Base ) that guides the LLM. 

Gradient Calculation An LLM summarizes the effec-tiveness of different optimizations from a replay buffer by calculat-ing the discrepancy, gk. Another LLM agent then generates the per-formance gap analysis, pk.

Gradient Update An LLM rewrites the context doc-ument ( θ) based on the summary to favor better strategies. PyTorch wall-clock time to generated kernel time-exceeding a threshold p:fast p = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

1(correct i ∧ { speedup i > p }),

System performance is also evaluated using cost, measured in the total number of tokens consumed to optimize the kernel. In our evaluation, we compare the tokens consumed by K ERNEL BLASTER ’s MAIC-RL agent compared to a baseline minimal agentic iteration loop. 

4.3 Execution Harness 

To evaluate our implemented kernels, we use a C++ based test harness, which includes driver code and a reference Torch implementation of the kernel. The driver also launches K ERNEL BLASTER ’s optimized CUDA implemen-tation, which consists of one or more innovations to CUDA kernels. First, if compilation errors occur, the solution is discarded, and the compilation feedback is returned to the code-lowering agent. Second, we run the code without profiling and return the numerical verification. Incorrect solutions are also re-attempted. Finally, we execute the optimized code, using NCU to profile kernels used in the optimized code. NCU results, including elapsed cycles and a profiled report of kernels’ detailed characteristics (e.g., memory- vs. compute-dominated behavior and major stall sources). All instances of kernels are profiled and indepen-dently reported to the agent in the order they were executed, to account for cases where the same kernel is used multiple times during program execution. 

4.4 Validation Harness 

Given the emergent challenge of reward hacking in agentic systems, a strong emphasis is placed on Correctness Ver-ification. This phenomenon, where an AI agent achieves a high reward by exploiting unintended loopholes in the evaluation environment rather than by solving the intended task, poses a significant threat to the validity of automated optimization. As reported by AI CUDA Engineer (Lange et al., 2025), which was found to achieve illusory speedups by exploiting a memory bug in the evaluation code to bypass correctness checks. To guard against such failure modes, generated code is numerically validated against the origi-nal PyTorch implementation. Additionally, we employ an LLM-based soft-verification pass that validates the structure of the final kernel against the initial KernelBench PyTorch implementation. Critically, this detects scenarios where the optimization agent eliminates functionality from the original kernel, leading to incorrect speedups. Additionally, to pre-vent shortcut behaviors such as calling optimized external libraries, our soft-verification agent ensures that generated kernels only use native CUDA functionality. 

4.5 Comparison against PyTorch 

Our primary baseline is a comparison against a PyTorch baseline, running the original KernelBench baseline code. As described in Section 4.2, we use the fast p metrics to demonstrate what percentage of kernels improve by the de-sired performance target over our baseline. On both Level 1 and Level 2 benchmarks, over 50% of optimized solutions improve upon the best-performing result between native Eager PyTorch and PyTorch Compile. This effect is particu-larly pronounced in Level-2 benchmarks, as seen in Figure 8. The reason we observe more significant benefits for Level 2 code is that these kernels typically have multiple composed operators, providing a larger search space for optimizations that the agentic flow can exploit. In comparison, Level 1 kernels are much simpler, limiting the scope of optimization 8Table 2. Comparison among Ours (K ERNEL BLASTER ), AI CUDA Engineer, and IREE ML compiler baseline. 

System Agent’s Models Hardware Setup Dataset Hyperparameter Test Harness Ours GPT-4.1 and GPT-5.0. NVIDIA A6000, A100, H100, L40S GPUs. KernelBench Level 1-2, Subset of Level 3 10 iterations, 10 rollout steps per iteration 

Functionality Check : Passing kernels are compiled and executed on GPUs; their outputs are compared to PyTorch baselines with multiple randomized seeds to ensure correctness and prevent overfitting. AI CUDA Engineer O4-mini, Claude 3.7 Sonnet, Gemini 2.5 Pro, GPT-4.1, and O3. NVIDIA H100 GPUs. KernelBench Level 1–2 10 generations; 8 proposals sampled per generation; top 4 evaluated. 

LLM Soft-Verification : The LLM scans each kernel for likely compilation, memory, or numerical errors, filtering out bad code before GPU execution. ML Compiler (IREE) N/A. NVIDIA A100 and A6000 GPUs. 

-O3 optimization level with LLVMGPU passes Kernels are profiled via NCU by wrapping the 

iree-run-module command, executing VMFB modules with randomized inputs to capture execution traces and performance metrics. 

Figure 7. fast p( r) distributions on NVIDIA H100 for KernelBench Level 1 and Level 2. The plot shows the percentage of kernels achieving at least r× speedup over PyTorch. Our approach yields a larger fraction of kernels with moderate-to-high speedups, particularly on Level 2 workloads that require coordinated, multi-step optimizations rather than isolated local rewrites. 

Table 3. Performance Comparison Across GPUs and Datasets 

ValidRate Average GeoMean Med. Min Max %>1x %<1x L40S Level 1 

IREE 85% 0.856 0.268 0.518 0.0035 9.01 21.18% 78.82% CUDAEng 82% 1.728 1.101 1.202 0.0659 32.35 74.39% 25.61% Ours 93% 4.502 1.080 1.037 0.0801 183.96 59.72% 40.28% 

Level 2 

IREE 83% 1.137 0.279 0.298 0.0255 38.50 16.87% 83.13% CUDAEng 83% 3.865 1.695 1.574 0.328 123.39 79.52% 20.48% Ours 95% 9.419 2.214 2.074 0.0488 362.29 72.60% 27.40% 

Level 3 

Ours 67% 1.749 1.502 1.894 0.529 2.681 75.0% 25.0% 

H100 Level 1 

CUDAEng 82% 1.935 1.025 1.085 0.0492 54.40 64.20% 35.80% Ours 86% 2.817 1.497 1.137 0.0647 32.74 70.37% 29.63% 

Level 2 

CUDAEng 82% 1.356 1.214 1.170 0.402 3.651 61.33% 38.67% Ours 81% 10.223 2.592 2.291 0.111 213.65 84.85% 15.15% 

Level 3 

Ours 67% 1.336 1.110 1.333 0.375 2.302 75.0% 25.0% 

ValidRate indicates the percentage of valid runs that have valid initial CUDA code that successfully pass both functionality and LLM-based soft verification checks. Baseline (1.0x) is measured as the best performance among torch.eager and 

torch.compile .

approaches. 

4.6 Comparison against Naive CUDA 

Comparison with PyTorch demonstrates sys’s capability against a standard reference. However, K ERNEL BLASTER ’s optimization flow does not directly optimize on top of native PyTorch code, but on a prior CUDA implementation. K ER -

NEL BLASTER begins optimization from functionally correct CUDA kernels generated from the KernelBench PyTorch implementations via an LLM agent. After verifying the cor-rectness of the generated kernel and driver, we execute our optimization workflow. We plot fast p curves across several GPUs against the naive CUDA code in Figure 9. When comparing against the naive CUDA baseline, we observe significant improvements, up to 100 × over the baseline. However, this is primarily due to the functional baseline missing basic optimization techniques, such as tiling or vec-torization. Due to this, we observe the greatest speedup in the simple Level 1 kernels, which can benefit greatly from these techniques. 

4.7 Comparison Against Other Agentic Workflows 

Figure 8 shows the fastp results for AI Cuda Engineer on the L40S GPU. K ERNEL BLASTER with cuDNN shows a consis-tently higher percentage of kernels with speedup exceeding r for both Level 1 and Level 2 problems. Additionally, the AI 9Figure 8. fast p curves for AI Cuda Engineer and K ERNEL BLASTER on an L40S GPU, including cuDNN augmentations.   

> Figure 9. fast pcurve for K ERNEL BLASTER ’s performance gains versus initial CUDA code across four NVIDIA GPU architectures: A6000 A100 (Ampere), H100 (Hopper), and L40S (Ada Lovelace) running KernelBench Level 1 and Level 2 Problems over Naive CUDA.

CUDA Engineer sees a lower validation rate (82%) and a ge-ometric mean speedup of 1.1x on Level 1 and 1.7x on Level 2 compared to the Pytorch baseline. Note that performance results may be impacted by the difference in our evaluation methodology as described in Section 4.1. We also compare against Kernelsseum, which represents the best zero-shot generation results from a simple prompting-based approach (Ouyang et al., 2025a). Compared to zero-shot baselines, we observe significant speedups due to the ability of K ER -

> NEL

BLASTER to learn from experience. However, future work can consider applications of the Knowledge Base to improve the generation of performant kernels without the need for online profiling. 

4.8 Comparison against IREE Compiler 

To establish a baseline representing modern ML compiler capabilities, we evaluated the IREE compiler (IREE, 2019), leveraging the torch-mlir (LLVM, 2020) frontend, on the KernelBench level 1 and level 2 benchmarks. Tar-geting NVIDIA A100 and A6000 GPUs, we attempted 400 compilations (100 kernels × 2 levels × 2 GPUs). IREE successfully compiled 358 kernels (89.5%), but 42 attempts failed. These failures primarily stemmed from unimplemented torch-mlir lowerings for nu-merous PyTorch operations (e.g., torch.aten.diag ,

torch.aten.broadcast tensors ), highlighting the significant effort required for ML compilers to keep pace with evolving frontend frameworks like PyTorch. Tables 3 showcase the slowdown of IREE against our baseline (Py-Torch Eager). IREE only achieves 27% of the speedup of Pytorch Eager for level 1 and 28% for level 2. This dis-crepancy can be partly attributed to IREE’s current primary optimization focus on AMD GPUs and CPUs, whereas the baseline benefits from more mature and specialized opti-mizations deeply integrated within the PyTorch and native NVIDIA CUDA ecosystem. 

4.9 Extending to Full Models 

We primarily apply K ERNEL BLASTER at the operator and level-granularity; this can be scaled to accelerate end-to-end models by optimizing individual components. However, we also evaluate our methodology on a subset of KernelBench Level 3 workloads. We therefore run our full optimization pipeline on a subset of KernelBench Level 3 workloads to assess whether the approach generalizes beyond isolated kernels. 10 Using the KernelBench Level 3 Network LeNet5 as an exam-ple, our generated CUDA implementation achieves a 2.68 ×

speedup over the PyTorch baseline, demonstrating that the methodology remains effective when multiple layers are composed into a full model rather than isolated kernels. For larger level3 blocks, such as SqueezeNetFireModule , we achieve 1.95 × improvement over PyTorch. The generated CUDA code in Section 8 shows that our agent applies the Knowledge Base discovered at Level 1 and Level 2 to Level 3. In particular, the agent performs cross-layer fusion to reduce kernel launch overhead, improves memory locality by reusing activations across consecutive linear layers, and applies algebraic and structural simpli-fications that reduce redundant memory traffic. Besides cross-layer fusion, algebraic simplification, and memory lo-cality, these optimizations are learned in Level 1 and Level 2 and transferred to Level 3 kernels. However, we observe scaling limitations for optimizing CUDA code for full-model problems. First, due to the large number of kernels and operators within level3 models, processing a singular optimization per iteration limits the performance improvement for the whole model. For prob-lems with multiple diverse kernels with diverse performance states and optimization opportunities, future work should consider processing vectors of state characterization and op-timization targets across the model. Furthermore, compared to the relatively concise problem representation of Kernel-Bench Python code, implementing full networks in native CUDA code results in extremely verbose source files, with significant overheads to boilerplate code, limiting reasoning ability, and diluting LLMs’ ability to identify performance signals. We expect that the agentic workflow would ben-efit from pre-processing the problem hierarchically into more manageable sub-problems; given our results in level2 problems, this would improve K ERNEL BLASTER ’s ability to improve end-to-end model performance by optimizing fused-layer sub-blocks. 

4.10 Cost Summary 

In Figure 10 we provide a summary of the measured speedup over the original CUDA reference code achieved per total tokens consumed. Although each problem runs for the same number of iterations, token count can vary widely, in part due to code size, number of kernels profiled, and complexity of optimizations selected. Overall, we observe a positive correlation, gaining better performance gains when more tokens were consumed to process the problem. 

4.11 Performance Summary 

Overall, we demonstrate that K ERNEL BLASTER can im-prove upon a wide range of prior techniques. In Figure 11, we show the speedups over PyTorch across several imple-   

> Figure 10. Scatter plot of speedups over the original CUDA per token costs.
> Figure 11. Geometric-mean speedup over PyTorch on NVIDIA H100 for KernelBench Level 1 and Level 2. We compare AI CUDA Engineer, our approach without cuDNN, and our approach with cuDNN enabled. Under identical hardware and evaluation conditions, our method achieves higher average speedups on both levels and composes effectively with vendor libraries.

mentations. First, we observe the greatest speedup of 7.9 ×

against traditional compiler baselines such as IREE. Further-more, we have additional speedups over zero-shot solutions due to our ability to learn from experience. For simple kernels with limited available optimization strategies, we achieve similar performance to prior agentic workflows. However, for Level 2 kernels, we are able to achieve im-proved performance over SOTA agentic workflows due to our ability to apply diverse optimizations. 

## 5 DISTRIBUTION OF OPTIMIZATION 

## USAGE 

A key benefit of K ERNEL BLASTER is its ability to discover and apply a diverse set of useful optimizations. The learned optimizations are stored in the Knowledge Base , approxi-mately 50 KB in size. These optimizations cover a wide range of kernel performance signatures and techniques, as depicted in Figure 12. Optimizations are grouped by state and are aggregated across all successful applications. No state dominates across optimization iterations, with no state exceeding 20%. An average of 5.5 states is reached per ker-nel, highlighting the need for detailed profiling feedback, as optimizations can dramatically change the program’s kernel signature. 11 Figure 12. Distribution of 3972 optimization applications by K ERNEL BLASTER to Level 1 and Level 2 KernelBench CUDA kernels on an A6000 GPU. 

KERNEL BLASTER ’s optimization trajectories provide an opportunity for characterizing directed sequences of opti-mizations. Analysis of optimization sequences on L40S GPUs reveals a strong, compute-centric strategy dominated by tactics like instruction level parallelism 

and tensor core utilization . This approach fea-tures significant repetition, but this “micro-tuning” of-ten proves unproductive; for example, over 50% of re-peated instruction level parallelism applica-tions (and over 80% for grid size optimization )yield negligible speedups ( < 1.01 ×). In contrast, the effi-cacy of transitions between different optimizations reveals valuable “prep →compute” patterns. The most significant gains come from preparatory memory optimizations: apply-ing shared memory tiling before tensor core -utilization yields a substantial median speedup of 

≈ 2.41 ×. Similarly, transforming data layouts before fusing operations ( ≈ 1.95 ×) or simplifying control flow before tensor core tuning ( ≈ 1.42 ×) provides significant, reliable performance boosts. These insights suggest that K ERNEL -BLASTER ’s approach to learning ¡state, optimization¿ pairs can exploit these high-yield preparatory transitions, steer-ing the search away from low-return repetition and towards these more impactful, structured transformations. Across all optimization trajectories, we observe a heavy-tailed distribution of technique usage and success. Fig-ures 14 and 13 summarize the total number of optimization attempts per technique, stacked by success versus failure, and the number of successful applications per technique. The attempt distribution is dominated by a small number of broadly applicable techniques, while many techniques are explored only rarely. This reflects an optimization process where general-purpose transformations are used as first-order probes across many kernels, and more specialized transformations are invoked selectively. Successful applications are concentrated in techniques such as SIMD operations, grid size optimization, instruction-level parallelism, block size adaptation, work-per-thread increase, register pressure reduction, fast-math, and thread coarsen-ing. These optimizations are local, broadly applicable, and frequently improve occupancy, instruction throughput, or launch overhead. Conversely, many high-frequency techniques also exhibit substantial failure mass, indicating that applying common heuristics without profiling-guided state awareness often leads to regressions. This motivates conditioning technique selection on profiling-derived signals rather than relying on uniform or frequency-based application. In summary, these results suggest a two-tier optimization strategy: first, use broadly applicable, low-cost transformations as probes; second, apply more structured transformations, such as memory-layout changes or reduction strategy changes, se-lectively when profiling indicates the relevant bottleneck. 

5.1 Hardware-Specific Optimizations and Limitations 

In the current evaluation, the agent primarily discovers al-gebraic simplifications, fusion opportunities, and memory-locality improvements. The generated kernels do leverage Tensor Cores and layout transformations for MMA. While we don’t observe Hopper-specific warp specialization, opti-mized kernels use SW specialization (producer-consumer, cooperative loading, warp-scoped specialization). 12 Figure 13. Counts of successful optimization applications per technique. 

Figure 14. Optimization attempts per technique, stacked by successful versus failed trials. 

13 6 ABLATION STUDIES 

6.1 Performance Learning Rate 

To understand the impact of K ERNEL BLASTER ’ Knowledge Base on code optimization performance, we conduct a study by limiting the ability of the ICRL flow to learn from expe-rience effectively. As described in Section 5, it is critical to develop and explore a wide range of optimization strate-gies when optimizing a diverse codebase. However, this diversity relies on K ERNEL BLASTER ’s ability to mutate its 

Knowledge Base by modifying and expanding entries. First, we study the impact of developing a Knowledge Base 

from scratch, compared to iterating upon a partially-trained data structure. The comparison between Figure 15 and Figure 16 shows the rate at which optimizations are ap-plied while optimizing the KernelBench Level 1 dataset. As seen in the left plot, although the first round to construct a 

Knowledge Base is expensive, future optimization passes can benefit from much faster coverage of optimizations. Fur-thermore, these generated databases can be reused across scenarios; The right plot demonstrates how a Knowledge Base trained on an A6000 GPU can be used for optimization runs across different GPU platforms. To understand the impact of the long-term memory ( Knowl-edgebase ), we isolate the contribution of profiling versus memory reuse by comparing against a no mem agent that has access to full Nsight Compute profiling but operates with an empty knowledge base and no state-conditioned reuse. 

no mem agent underperforms our full system, achieving 1.67x slower results. Thus, profiling information alone provides meaningful but limited gains, whereas persistent knowledge reuse is necessary to transfer previously suc-cessful optimization strategies across kernels. Ablations show that profiling feedback alone is necessary but not suffi-cient: the strongest gains arise from the interaction between structured profiling signals and a persistent, state-aware knowledge base.       

> Figure 15. Discovery and application of new optimizations as optimizations are attempted when learning with a pretrained and empty Knowledge Base .
> Figure 16. Discovery and application of new optimizations as opti-mizations are attempted when reusing a Knowledge Base trained on A6000 on other GPUs.
> Figure 17. Performance improvement across the number of trajec-tories. The shaded region shows the inter-quartile range (IQR) of optimized kernels.

6.2 Hyperparameter Analysis 

The key hyperparameters of K ERNEL BLASTER are trajec-tory length and number of trajectories, corresponding to search depth and breadth, respectively. In Figure 17, we an-alyze the impact of search breadth. We observe diminishing returns for increasing trajectory count beyond 8, particularly for median and top 25 th kernels. However, we do see ad-ditional benefits for the lower 25 th percentile kernels. On the other hand, Figure 18 highlights the diminishing returns of search depth beyond 4 optimizations, as exhausting rel-evant optimizations to the kernel. An interesting finding, however, is that kernels with high potential for speedup con-tinue to have marginal benefits from additional optimization sequences up to 8 consecutive optimizations, opening up hyperparameters for tuning based on LLM inference cost and performance targets. 14 Figure 18. Box plot of performance improvement across trajectory lengths.  

> Figure 19. Speedup over PyTorch comparing our full approach against a cycles-only ablation. Removing non-cycle signals de-grades performance across most kernels, indicating that additional feedback beyond raw cycle counts is necessary for effective opti-mization.

6.3 Profiling Fidelity Analysis 

To understand the impact of profiling fidelity, we conducted ablation studies against an agent that accesses only cycle-level runtime feedback instead of detailed NCU profiles. The cycle-only agent underperforms approaches that use NCU (1.22x speedup over PyTorch on Level-2 compared to 1.57x with NCU data), indicating that scalar latency alone is insufficient to infer why a kernel is slow or which opti-mization direction to optimize next. 

6.4 Comparison Against Minimal Agent 

Finally, we compare against a minimal agent. At each it-eration, this agent directly takes in CUDA code and NCU profiling data and outputs optimized code. When running 10 trajectories of length 10, this agent requires 2.4x tokens compared to K ERNEL BLASTER . We observe this is due to two primary causes: 1. Due to not having access to a Knowledgebase and a guided reasoning process, this agent must devote more tokens up-front for reasoning about the optimizations 2. The minimal agent requires more retrievals for correct-ness compared to K ERNEL BLASTER .Compared to K ERNEL BLASTER , this minimal agent has 0.379x performance improvement per token. Furthermore, KERNEL BLASTER achieves better performance in 71% of cases compared to the simplified agent. 

## 7 CONCLUSIONS & F UTURE WORK 

In summary, K ERNEL BLASTER demonstrates the potential of In-Context Reinforcement Learning for CUDA optimiza-tion, with a geometric mean performance speedup of 1.32x on Kernelbench Level 1 and 2 problems compared to the Py-torch baseline. The results show that LLMs can dynamically adapt optimization strategies at inference time, a capability achieved by learning from a history of successes and failures stored within a novel, compact, domain-specific long-term memory solution. In addition to providing an agentic code optimization work-flow that can achieve performance improvements over prior work, we also provide insights on the characteristics of code optimization workflows. We cover the impacts of optimiza-tion diversity, learning ability, and search hyperparameters. Moreover, we observe the impact of different optimization classes, including complex optimization sequences. Building on the foundation established by KERNEL -BLASTER , our future work focuses on developing more sophisticated solutions to target system performance. To improve Knowledgebase management and reduce storage overheads and bias towards early entries, future directions will explore strategies such as randomized sampling and periodic updates of the Knowledgebase. To optimize for quality, cost, and latency of LLM calls, we plan to leverage model heterogeneity, a technique that utilizes smaller, more efficient models for simpler agents and more powerful models for more complex agents in the workflow. A critical challenge in code optimization is the problem of phase ordering: the effectiveness of a transformation often depends on the sequence in which it is applied. Furthermore, K ERNEL BLASTER gradients provide a mech-anism for rapid iteration and deployment of customized agents that respond to diverse user needs. With this struc-ture, LLMs can learn not only from immediate interaction traces but also from a growing database of structured ex-perience. While a single agent’s database is not useful for updating model parameters, a database aggregated from the full spectrum of agentic systems deployed can be used to train and refine the model itself. This would allow short-term, in-context adaptations to be distilled into long-term, parameter-level improvements, turning accumulated experi-ence into durable capability. 15 REFERENCES 

Agrawal, L. A., Tan, S., Soylu, D., Ziems, N., Khare, R., Opsahl-Ong, K., Singhvi, A., Shandilya, H., Ryan, M. J., Jiang, M., Potts, C., Sen, K., Dimakis, A. G., Sto-ica, I., Klein, D., Zaharia, M., and Khattab, O. Gepa: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforce-ment learning. Preprint, arXiv:2507.19457, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19457 .Assump c¸ ˜ ao, H., Ferreira, D., Campos, L., and Murai, F. Codeevolve: An open source evolutionary coding agent for algorithm discovery and optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14150 , 2025. Open-source framework com-bining an islands-based genetic algorithm with modular LLM orchestration and execution feedback for selection and task-specific metrics. Baronio, C., Marsella, P., Pan, B., and Alberti, S. Kevin-32b: Multi-turn rl for writing cuda kernels. https:// cognition.ai/blog/kevin-32b , 2025a. Cogni-tion AI Blog. Accessed: May 19, 2025. Baronio, C., Marsella, P., Pan, B., and Alberti, S. Kevin-32b: Multi-turn rl for writing cuda kernels. https: //cognition.ai/blog/kevin-32b , 2025b. Ac-cessed: 2025-10-26. Brooks, E., Walls, L., Lewis, R. L., and Singh, S. Large language models can implement policy iteration, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03821 .Chen, W., Zhu, J., Fan, Q., Ma, Y., and Zou, A. Cuda-llm: Llms can write efficient cuda kernels. Preprint, arXiv:2506.09092, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2506.09092v1 .Cummins, C., Seeker, V., Grubisic, D., Roziere, B., Gehring, J., Synnaeve, G., and Leather, H. LLM compiler: Founda-tion language models for compiler optimization. In Pro-ceedings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN International Con-ference on Compiler Construction , pp. 141–153, 2025. Damani, S., Hari, S. K. S., Stephenson, M., and Kozyrakis, C. Warpdrive: An agentic workflow for ninja gpu trans-formations. (2024), 2024. Dao, T. Flashattention-2: Faster attention with bet-ter parallelism and work partitioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08691 , 2023. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2307.08691 .DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 , 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2412.19437 .Demircan, C., Saanum, T., Jagadish, A. K., Binz, M., and Schulz, E. Sparse autoencoders reveal temporal differ-ence learning in large language models, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01280 .Gim, I., Ma, Z., seob Lee, S., and Zhong, L. Pie: A pro-grammable serving system for emerging llm applications. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’25) , 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24051 .Gong, J., Voskanyan, V., Brookes, P., Wu, F., Jie, W., Xu, J., Giavrimis, R., Basios, M., Kanthan, L., and Wang, Z. Language models for code optimization: Survey, chal-lenges and future directions, 2025. Guo, P., Zhu, C., Chen, S., Liu, F., Lin, X., Lu, Z., and Zhang, Q. Evoengineer: Mastering automated cuda kernel code evolution with large language mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.03760 , 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03760 .Hong, C., Bhatia, S., Cheung, A., and Shao, Y. S. Auto-comp: Llm-driven code optimization for tensor accelera-tors, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505. 18574 .IREE. Iree. https://iree.dev/ , September 2019. An MLIR-based compiler and runtime for ML models from multiple frameworks. Repository: https://github. com/iree-org/iree .Lange, R. T., Prasad, A., Sun, Q., Faldor, M., Tang, Y., and Ha, D. The AI CUDA engineer: Agentic CUDA kernel discovery, optimization and composition. https:// sakana.ai/ai-cuda-engineer , 2025. Sakana AI Blog Post. Accessed: May 19, 2025. Li, X., Sun, X., Wang, A., Li, J., and Shum, C. Cuda-l1: Im-proving cuda optimization via contrastive reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.14111 , 2025. Liao, G., Qin, H., Wang, Y., Golden, A., Kuchnik, M., Yetim, Y., Ang, J. J., Fu, C., He, Y., Hsia, S., Jiang, Z., Li, D., Pashkevich, U., Puvvada, V., Shi, F., Steiner, M., Xiao, R., Yan, N., Yu, X., Yu, Z., Chi, W., Huang, B., Zhang, S., Weller, N., Marine, Z., Cook, W., Wu, C.-J., and Liu, G. Kernelevolve: Scaling agentic ker-nel coding for heterogeneous ai accelerators at meta. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.23236 , 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2512.23236 .Lin, H., Maas, M., Roquemore, M., Hasanzadeh, A., Lewis, F., Simonson, Y., Yang, T.-W., Yazdanbakhsh, A., Altinb ¨uken, D., Papa, F., Nolan Edmonds, M., Patil, A., Schwarz, D., Chandra, S., Kennelly, C., Hashemi, M., and Ranganathan, P. Eco: An llm-driven effi-cient code optimizer for warehouse scale computers. 16 arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15669 , 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2503.15669 .LLVM. Torch-mlir. https://github.com/llvm/ torch-mlir , 2020. The Torch-MLIR project aims to provide first class support from the PyTorch ecosystem to the MLIR ecosystem. Monea, G., Bosselut, A., Brantley, K., and Artzi, Y. Llms are in-context bandit reinforcement learners, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05362 .Novikov, A., V ˜u, N., Eisenberger, M., Dupont, E., Huang, P.-S., Wagner, A. Z., Shirobokov, S., Kozlovskii, B., Ruiz, F. J. R., Mehrabian, A., Kumar, M. P., See, A., Chaudhuri, S., Holland, G., Davies, A., Nowozin, S., Kohli, P., and Balog, M. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 ,2025. NVIDIA. NVIDIA H100 Tensor Core GPU Architecture. Technical report, NVIDIA Corporation, 2022. NVIDIA. Nvidia h800 ai/deep learning gpu. https: //www.nvidia.com/ , 2023. Part of NVIDIA’s Hop-per architecture GPU family with 80GB high-bandwidth memory, targeting large-scale AI workloads. Opsahl-Ong, K., Ryan, M. J., Purtell, J., Broman, D., Potts, C., Zaharia, M., and Khattab, O. Optimizing instructions and demonstrations for multi-stage language model pro-grams. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11695 , 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11695 . Sub-mitted June 17, 2024; last revised October 6, 2024. Ouyang, A., Guo, S., and Mirhoseini, A. Kernel-bench: Can llms write gpu kernels?, 2024. URL 

https://scalingintelligence.stanford. edu/blogs/kernelbench/ .Ouyang, A., Guo, S., Arora, S., Zhang, A. L., Hu, W., R ´e, C., and Mirhoseini, A. Kernelbench: Can llms write effi-cient gpu kernels? arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10517v1 ,2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/html/2502. 10517v1 .Ouyang, A., Mirhoseini, A., and Liang, P. Surpris-ingly fast ai-generated kernels we didn’t mean to publish (yet). Stanford CRFM Blog, May 2025b. URL https://crfm.stanford.edu/2025/05/ 28/fast-kernels.html .Peng, H., Cao, H., Fong, L. L., Li, J. F., Zhao, D., Choud-hury, A. N. M. I., Gupta, H., Kozyrakis, C., Delimitrou, C., and Wisniewski, R. Sysllmatic: Large language mod-els are software system optimizers, 2025. PyTorch Team. torch.compile : A new compilation mode in pytorch. https://docs.pytorch.org/ tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_ tutorial.html , 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-29. Sevilla, J., Heim, L., Ho, A., Besiroglu, T., Hobbhahn, M., and Villalobos, P. Compute trends across three eras of machine learning. In 2022 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN) , pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2022. Shah, J., Bikshandi, G., Zhang, Y., Thakkar, V., Ramani, P., and Dao, T. Flashattention-3: Fast and accurate attention with asynchrony and low-precision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08608 , 2024. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2407.08608 .Sharma, A. Openevolve: an open-source evolution-ary coding agent, 2025. URL https://github. com/algorithmicsuperintelligence/ openevolve .Taneja, J., Laird, A., Yan, C., Musuvathi, M., and Lahiri, S. K. Llm-vectorizer: Llm-based verified loop vector-izer. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization , pp. 137–149, 2025. Wang, J., Blaser, E., Daneshmand, H., and Zhang, S. Trans-formers can learn temporal difference methods for in-context reinforcement learning, 2025a. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2405.13861 .Wang, L. et al. Kernelfalcon: Deep agent architecture for au-tonomous gpu kernel generation. PyTorch Blog, Novem-ber 2025b. Blog post. Williams, R. J. Simple statistical gradient-following algo-rithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning , 8:229–256, 1992. Yao, S. et al. Textgrad: Automatic ”differentiation” via text. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496 , 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2406.07496 .Zhang, Z., Wang, R., Li, S., Luo, Y., Hong, M., and Ding, C. Cudaforge: An agent framework with hardware feedback for cuda kernel optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01884 , 2025. 17 8 APPENDIX 

8.1 Representative Fused Kernel Launch (KernelBench Level 2 Q18) 

We provide a detailed kernel-level analysis of KernelBench Level 2 Q18, where our method achieves a 20.17 × speedup over the PyTorch baseline. The dominant contributor is an algebraic optimization: after a sequence of reductions, the tensor has shape (batch size , 1) , yet logsumexp is applied twice along that dimension. Since logsumexp( x, dim = 1) = x when the dimension size is one, these operations are algebraically redundant and can be removed exactly without approximation. Additionally, the generated CUDA implementations further improve performance through kernel fusion (directly producing the final scalar output without materializing an intermediate vector), improved instruction-level parallelism via unrolled accumulation, and efficient block-level reduction using warp shuffles instead of global atomics. These optimizations reduce global memory traffic and kernel launch overhead while preserving correctness.  

> 1

// Warp-level reduction using shuffle  

> 2

__inline__ __device__ float warp_reduce_sum(float val) { 

> 3

unsigned mask = 0xFFFFFFFFu;  

> 4

for (int offset = WARP_SIZE / 2; offset > 0; offset >>= 1) { 

> 5

val += __shfl_down_sync(mask, val, offset);  

> 6

} 

> 7

return val;  

> 8

} 

> 910

// Block-level reduction built on top of warp reduction  

> 11

__inline__ __device__ float block_reduce_sum(float val) { 

> 12

__shared__ float warp_sums[32]; // supports up to 1024 threads/block  

> 13

int lane = threadIdx.x & (WARP_SIZE - 1);  

> 14

int warp_id = threadIdx.x >> 5;  

> 15 16

val = warp_reduce_sum(val);  

> 17

if (lane == 0) warp_sums[warp_id] = val;  

> 18

__syncthreads();  

> 19 20

float out = 0.0f;  

> 21

if (warp_id == 0) { 

> 22

const int num_warps = (blockDim.x + WARP_SIZE - 1) / WARP_SIZE;  

> 23

out = (lane < num_warps) ? warp_sums[lane] : 0.0f;  

> 24

out = warp_reduce_sum(out);  

> 25

} 

> 26

return out;  

> 27

} 

> 28 29

__global__ void model_forward_kernel(__half* __restrict__ output,  

> 30

const __half* __restrict__ input,  

> 31

const __half* __restrict__ weight,  

> 32

const __half* __restrict__ bias,  

> 33

int batch_size, int in_features, int out_features) { 

> 34

const int b = blockIdx.x;  

> 35

if (b >= batch_size) return;  

> 36 37

// Stage a tile of the input vector into shared memory for reuse across out_features  

> 38

__shared__ float s_x[TILE_K];  

> 39 40

const __half* x_base = input + static_cast<size_t>(b) * in_features;  

> 41 42

// Pre-accumulate the bias terms across the subset of out_features handled by this thread  

> 43

float local_bias_sum = 0.0f;  

> 44

const int o_iters = (out_features + blockDim.x - 1) / blockDim.x;  

> 45

#pragma unroll  

> 46

for (int it = 0; it < o_iters; ++it) { 

> 47

const int o = it * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;  

> 48

if (o < out_features) { 

> 49

local_bias_sum += __half2float(bias[o]); 

18 50 } 

> 51

} 

> 52 53

// Accumulate the dot products across tiles of in_features  

> 54

float thread_accum = 0.0f;  

> 55 56

for (int k0 = 0; k0 < in_features; k0 += TILE_K) { 

> 57

const int remaining = in_features - k0;  

> 58

const int tile = (TILE_K < remaining) ? TILE_K : remaining;  

> 59 60

// Cooperative load of the input tile into shared memory  

> 61

for (int t = threadIdx.x; t < tile; t += blockDim.x) { 

> 62

s_x[t] = __half2float(x_base[k0 + t]);  

> 63

} 

> 64

__syncthreads();  

> 65 66

// For this input tile, accumulate contributions for this thread’s assigned out_features  

> 67

#pragma unroll  

> 68

for (int it = 0; it < o_iters; ++it) { 

> 69

const int o = it * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;  

> 70

if (o < out_features) { 

> 71

const __half* __restrict__ w_row = weight + static_cast<size_t>(o) * in_features + k0;  

> 72 73

// Multiple independent accumulators to increase ILP and reduce dependency chains  

> 74

float a0 = 0.0f, a1 = 0.0f, a2 = 0.0f, a3 = 0.0f;  

> 75

float a4 = 0.0f, a5 = 0.0f, a6 = 0.0f, a7 = 0.0f;  

> 76 77

int t = 0;  

> 78 79

// Main unrolled loop processes UNROLL_T elements per iteration  

> 80

#pragma unroll  

> 81

for (; t + (UNROLL_T - 1) < tile; t += UNROLL_T) { 

> 82

// Load inputs from shared memory  

> 83

float x0 = s_x[t + 0];  

> 84

float x1 = s_x[t + 1];  

> 85

float x2 = s_x[t + 2];  

> 86

float x3 = s_x[t + 3];  

> 87

float x4 = s_x[t + 4];  

> 88

float x5 = s_x[t + 5];  

> 89

float x6 = s_x[t + 6];  

> 90

float x7 = s_x[t + 7];  

> 91 92

// Convert weights from half to float and accumulate with FMA  

> 93

a0 = fmaf(x0, __half2float(w_row[t + 0]), a0);  

> 94

a1 = fmaf(x1, __half2float(w_row[t + 1]), a1);  

> 95

a2 = fmaf(x2, __half2float(w_row[t + 2]), a2);  

> 96

a3 = fmaf(x3, __half2float(w_row[t + 3]), a3);  

> 97

a4 = fmaf(x4, __half2float(w_row[t + 4]), a4);  

> 98

a5 = fmaf(x5, __half2float(w_row[t + 5]), a5);  

> 99

a6 = fmaf(x6, __half2float(w_row[t + 6]), a6);  

> 100

a7 = fmaf(x7, __half2float(w_row[t + 7]), a7);  

> 101

} 

> 102 103

// Tail handling for remaining elements (< UNROLL_T)  

> 104

float tail = 0.0f;  

> 105

#pragma unroll  

> 106

for (; t < tile; ++t) { 

> 107

tail = fmaf(s_x[t], __half2float(w_row[t]), tail);  

> 108

} 

> 109 110

// Combine partial accumulators  

> 111

float partial = (((a0 + a1) + (a2 + a3)) + ((a4 + a5) + (a6 + a7))) + tail; 

19 112 113 thread_accum += partial;  

> 114

} 

> 115

} 

> 116

__syncthreads();  

> 117

} 

> 118 119

// Add bias sum after finishing all dot-product tiles  

> 120

thread_accum += local_bias_sum;  

> 121 122

// Reduce across the block to produce the final scalar for this batch element  

> 123

float block_sum = block_reduce_sum(thread_accum);  

> 124

if (threadIdx.x == 0) { 

> 125

output[b] = __float2half_rn(block_sum);  

> 126

} 

> 127

} 

> 128 129

void launch_gpu_implementation(void* output, void* input, void* weight, void* bias,  

> 130

int batch_size, int in_features, int out_features) {  

> 131

if (batch_size <= 0 || in_features <= 0 || out_features <= 0) { 

> 132

return;  

> 133

} 

> 134 135

// One block per batch element to expose ILP across out_features inside the block.  

> 136

// Use a power-of-two block size for efficient reductions.  

> 137

const int threads_per_block = 256;  

> 138

const int blocks = batch_size; // block per batch sample  

> 139 140

model_forward_kernel<<<blocks, threads_per_block>>>(  

> 141

static_cast<__half*>(output),  

> 142

static_cast<const __half*>(input),  

> 143

static_cast<const __half*>(weight),  

> 144

static_cast<const __half*>(bias),  

> 145

batch_size, in_features, out_features  

> 146

);  

> 147 148

cudaDeviceSynchronize();  

> 149

}

8.2 Representative Tensor Core Optimizations (KernelBench Level 2 063 ) 

The implementation realizes an FP16 ×FP16 →FP32 GEMM using NVIDIA WMMA, where each warp computes a 16 × 16 

output tile via mma sync and four warps form a 32 × 32 block tile. The K dimension is partitioned across grid.z 

(split-K), so each block accumulates over a disjoint K slice. Full tiles are loaded directly from global memory into WMMA fragments, while boundary tiles are packed with zero padding into per-warp shared-memory buffers to satisfy fragment layout constraints. Weights stored as [N × K] row-major are consumed as column-major matrix b fragments through pointer and leading-dimension adjustments, avoiding explicit transposition. Partial FP32 accumulations from each split-K slice are written to a global workspace using atomicAdd , followed by a separate epilogue kernel that applies bias, ReLU, scaling, and FP16 casting. The design explicitly targets Tensor Core utilization with mixed precision, combines direct-load and packed execution paths for correctness across arbitrary dimensions, isolates per-warp shared-memory regions to avoid cross-warp synchronization, and employs split-K parallelism to increase concurrency at the cost of atomic reduction overhead.  

> 1

#include <cuda_fp16.h>  

> 2

#include <mma.h>  

> 3

#include <cuda_runtime.h>  

> 4

#include <stdint.h>  

> 5

#include <stddef.h>  

> 67

using namespace nvcuda;  

> 89

// Constants and tiling parameters 

20 10 #define WARP_SIZE 32  

> 11

#define MMA_M 16  

> 12

#define MMA_N 16  

> 13

#define MMA_K 16  

> 14 15

// Warp tile mapping: 2x2 tiles per block -> 4 warps  

> 16

#define TILES_PER_BLOCK_M 2 

> 17

#define TILES_PER_BLOCK_N 2 

> 18

#define WARPS_PER_BLOCK (TILES_PER_BLOCK_M * TILES_PER_BLOCK_N)  

> 19 20

#define BLOCK_ROWS (TILES_PER_BLOCK_M * MMA_M) // 32  

> 21

#define BLOCK_COLS (TILES_PER_BLOCK_N * MMA_N) // 32  

> 22 23

#define THREADS_PER_BLOCK (WARP_SIZE * WARPS_PER_BLOCK)  

> 24 25

// Shared memory sizing per warp: accumulator (float 16x16) + A pack (half 16x16) + B pack (half 16x16)  

> 26

#define ACCUM_ELEMENTS (MMA_M * MMA_N) // 256  

> 27

#define ACCUM_BYTES (ACCUM_ELEMENTS * sizeof(float)) // 1024  

> 28

#define PACK_BYTES (ACCUM_ELEMENTS * sizeof(__half))// 512  

> 29 30

// Align up to 16 bytes  

> 31

#define ALIGN_UP_16(x) (((x) + 15) & ˜((size_t)15))  

> 32

#define PER_WARP_SHARED_BYTES ALIGN_UP_16((size_t)(ACCUM_BYTES + 2 * PACK_BYTES))  

> 33 34

// Simple min/max macros for device code  

> 35

#define MIN(a,b) (( (a) < (b) ) ? (a) : (b))  

> 36

#define MAX(a,b) (( (a) > (b) ) ? (a) : (b))  

> 37 38

// Helper: compute one 16x16 tile for a specified K-slice [k_start, k_start + k_count)  

> 39

__device__ __forceinline__ void wmma_tile_16x16_splitk(  

> 40

const __half* __restrict__ A_tile_base, int lda, // lda = K 

> 41

const __half* __restrict__ B_colmajor_base, int ldb, // ldb = K (weights as [N x K] row -major, loaded as col-major)  

> 42

int m_eff, int n_eff,  

> 43

int k_start, int k_count, // K-slice control  

> 44

float* __restrict__ accum_out, // per-warp 16x16 float tile  

> 45

__half* __restrict__ a_pack, __half* __restrict__ b_pack) // per-warp 16x16 half pack buffers  

> 46

{ 

> 47

const int lane_id = threadIdx.x % WARP_SIZE;  

> 48 49

wmma::fragment<wmma::accumulator, MMA_M, MMA_N, MMA_K, float> c_frag;  

> 50

wmma::fill_fragment(c_frag, 0.0f);  

> 51 52

int processed = 0;  

> 53

while (processed < k_count) { 

> 54

const int kk = processed;  

> 55

const int k_frag = MIN(MMA_K, k_count - kk);  

> 56

const bool full_tile = (m_eff == MMA_M) && (n_eff == MMA_N) && (k_frag == MMA_K);  

> 57 58

if (full_tile) { 

> 59

// Fast path: direct global loads  

> 60

wmma::fragment<wmma::matrix_a, MMA_M, MMA_N, MMA_K, __half, wmma::row_major> a_frag;  

> 61

// Load BˆT as col-major to consume weights stored as [N x K] row-major  

> 62

wmma::fragment<wmma::matrix_b, MMA_M, MMA_N, MMA_K, __half, wmma::col_major> b_frag;  

> 63

// A: row-major, advance by k_start + kk  

> 64

wmma::load_matrix_sync(a_frag, A_tile_base + (k_start + kk), lda);  

> 65

// B: treat original weight as [N x K] row-major; to obtain BˆT (KxN) in col-major, use base pointer at (col=c_col, row=k_start+kk) with ldb=K.  

> 66

wmma::load_matrix_sync(b_frag, B_colmajor_base + (k_start + kk), ldb);  

> 67

wmma::mma_sync(c_frag, a_frag, b_frag, c_frag);  

> 68

} else {

21 69 // Pack with zero padding for partial M/N or K-tail  

> 70

for (int idx = lane_id; idx < ACCUM_ELEMENTS; idx += WARP_SIZE) { 

> 71

a_pack[idx] = __float2half(0.0f);  

> 72

b_pack[idx] = __float2half(0.0f);  

> 73

} 

> 74

__syncwarp();  

> 75 76

// Pack A (row-major): rows [0..m_eff-1], cols [0..k_frag-1]  

> 77

for (int idx = lane_id; idx < ACCUM_ELEMENTS; idx += WARP_SIZE) { 

> 78

const int ii = idx / MMA_N; // row in 16x16  

> 79

const int jj = idx % MMA_N; // col in 16x16  

> 80

if (ii < m_eff && jj < k_frag) { 

> 81

a_pack[ii * MMA_N + jj] = A_tile_base[ii * lda + (k_start + kk + jj)];  

> 82

} 

> 83

} 

> 84 85

// Pack B into COL-MAJOR buffer:  

> 86

// desired element = weight[(c_col + jj) * K + (k_start + kk + ii)]  

> 87

// store into b_pack col-major with ld=16: ii + jj * 16  

> 88

for (int idx = lane_id; idx < ACCUM_ELEMENTS; idx += WARP_SIZE) { 

> 89

const int ii = idx % MMA_K; // row along K-frag  

> 90

const int jj = idx / MMA_K; // col along N-frag  

> 91

if (ii < k_frag && jj < n_eff) { 

> 92

b_pack[ii + jj * MMA_K] = B_colmajor_base[(k_start + kk + ii) + jj * ldb];  

> 93

} 

> 94

} 

> 95

__syncwarp();  

> 96 97

wmma::fragment<wmma::matrix_a, MMA_M, MMA_N, MMA_K, __half, wmma::row_major> a_frag_pack;  

> 98

wmma::fragment<wmma::matrix_b, MMA_M, MMA_N, MMA_K, __half, wmma::col_major> b_frag_pack;  

> 99

wmma::load_matrix_sync(a_frag_pack, a_pack, MMA_N); // row-major with ld=16  

> 100

wmma::load_matrix_sync(b_frag_pack, b_pack, MMA_K); // col-major with ld=16  

> 101

wmma::mma_sync(c_frag, a_frag_pack, b_frag_pack, c_frag);  

> 102

} 

> 103 104

processed += k_frag;  

> 105

} 

> 106 107

// Store accumulator to per-warp float tile buffer (row-major 16x16)  

> 108

wmma::store_matrix_sync(accum_out, c_frag, MMA_N, wmma::mem_row_major);  

> 109

__syncwarp();  

> 110

} 

> 111 112

// Kernel 1: Split-K partial GEMM accumulation into a global float workspace using atomicAdd  

> 113

__global__ void splitk_gemm_accumulate_kernel(  

> 114

const __half* __restrict__ A, // [M x K], row-major  

> 115

const __half* __restrict__ B, // weight as [N x K], row-major  

> 116

float* __restrict__ workspace, // [M x N], row-major (float accumulators), pre-zeroed  

> 117

int M, int N, int K,  

> 118

int K_per_slice)  

> 119

{ 

> 120

const int warp_id = threadIdx.x / WARP_SIZE;  

> 121 122

// Map each warp to a unique 16x16 tile inside a 2x2 tile group per block  

> 123

const int warp_m = warp_id / TILES_PER_BLOCK_N; // 0..(TILES_PER_BLOCK_M-1)  

> 124

const int warp_n = warp_id % TILES_PER_BLOCK_N; // 0..(TILES_PER_BLOCK_N-1)  

> 125 126

const int c_row_base = blockIdx.y * BLOCK_ROWS + warp_m * MMA_M;  

> 127

const int c_col_base = blockIdx.x * BLOCK_COLS + warp_n * MMA_N;  

> 128 129

// Check bounds and compute effective tile sizes  

> 130

const int m_eff = MAX(0, MIN(MMA_M, M - c_row_base)); 

22 131 const int n_eff = MAX(0, MIN(MMA_N, N - c_col_base));  

> 132

if (m_eff <= 0 || n_eff <= 0) { 

> 133

return;  

> 134

} 

> 135 136

// K-slice for this block in grid.z  

> 137

const int slice_id = blockIdx.z;  

> 138

const int k_start = slice_id * K_per_slice;  

> 139

const int k_count = MAX(0, MIN(K_per_slice, K - k_start));  

> 140

if (k_count <= 0) return;  

> 141 142

// Dynamic shared memory layout (per-warp independent regions)  

> 143

extern __shared__ unsigned char shared_bytes[];  

> 144

// Ensure 16-byte alignment of our base pointer  

> 145

uintptr_t base_addr = reinterpret_cast<uintptr_t>(shared_bytes);  

> 146

base_addr = (base_addr + 15u) & ˜((uintptr_t)15u);  

> 147

unsigned char* shmem_aligned = reinterpret_cast<unsigned char*>(base_addr);  

> 148 149

unsigned char* warp_shmem_base = shmem_aligned + warp_id * PER_WARP_SHARED_BYTES;  

> 150 151

float* accum_out = reinterpret_cast<float*>(warp_shmem_base);  

> 152

__half* a_pack = reinterpret_cast<__half*>(warp_shmem_base + ACCUM_BYTES);  

> 153

__half* b_pack = reinterpret_cast<__half*>(warp_shmem_base + ACCUM_BYTES + PACK_BYTES);  

> 154 155

// Base pointers for this tile  

> 156

const __half* A_tile_base = A + c_row_base * K; // row-major MxK  

> 157

// Treat weight B as [N x K] row-major; to load BˆT as col-major fragments,  

> 158

// set base pointer at the start of column block j=c_col_base: &B[j*K]  

> 159

const __half* B_tile_col = B + c_col_base * K; // base for col-major load with ldb=K  

> 160 161

// Compute partial GEMM over [k_start, k_start + k_count)  

> 162

wmma_tile_16x16_splitk(  

> 163

A_tile_base, K,  

> 164

B_tile_col, K,  

> 165

m_eff, n_eff,  

> 166

k_start, k_count,  

> 167

accum_out, a_pack, b_pack  

> 168

);  

> 169 170

// Atomically accumulate partial results into global float workspace  

> 171

const int lane_id = threadIdx.x % WARP_SIZE;  

> 172

const int total_out_elems = m_eff * n_eff;  

> 173

for (int idx = lane_id; idx < total_out_elems; idx += WARP_SIZE) { 

> 174

const int i = idx / n_eff; // 0..m_eff-1  

> 175

const int j = idx % n_eff; // 0..n_eff-1  

> 176

const int global_row = c_row_base + i;  

> 177

const int global_col = c_col_base + j;  

> 178

const float val = accum_out[i * MMA_N + j];  

> 179

atomicAdd(&workspace[global_row * N + global_col], val);  

> 180

} 

> 181

} 

> 182 183

// Kernel 2: Epilogue applying bias + ReLU + division and cast to __half  

> 184

__global__ void epilogue_bias_relu_div_kernel(  

> 185

const float* __restrict__ workspace, // [M x N], row-major (float accumulators)  

> 186

const __half* __restrict__ bias, // [N]  

> 187

__half* __restrict__ C, // [M x N], row-major  

> 188

float divisor,  

> 189

int M, int N)  

> 190

{ 

> 191

const float inv_div = 1.0f / divisor;  

> 192

const int tid = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;  

> 193

const int total_elems = M * N;  

> 194 195

for (int idx = tid; idx < total_elems; idx += gridDim.x * blockDim.x) {

23 196 const int col = idx % N;  

> 197

float val = workspace[idx];  

> 198

val += __half2float(bias[col]);  

> 199

val = fmaxf(val, 0.0f) * inv_div;  

> 200

C[idx] = __float2half_rn(val);  

> 201

} 

> 202

} 

> 203 204

// Host launcher: split-K two-pass implementation  

> 205

void launch_gpu_implementation(void* output, void* input, void* weight, void* bias, float divisor,  

> 206

int batch_size, int in_features, int out_features) {  

> 207

// Problem sizes  

> 208

const int M = batch_size;  

> 209

const int K = in_features;  

> 210

const int N = out_features;  

> 211 212

// Tile grid covering MxN by 32x32 blocks (4 warps per block)  

> 213

dim3 grid_xy(  

> 214

(N + BLOCK_COLS - 1) / BLOCK_COLS,  

> 215

(M + BLOCK_ROWS - 1) / BLOCK_ROWS  

> 216

);  

> 217 218

// Heuristic for split-K: target ˜256 K per slice, up to 8 slices  

> 219

int split_k_slices = 1;  

> 220

if (K >= 256) { 

> 221

const int target_per_slice = 256;  

> 222

split_k_slices = (K + target_per_slice - 1) / target_per_slice;  

> 223

if (split_k_slices > 8) split_k_slices = 8;  

> 224

if (split_k_slices < 1) split_k_slices = 1;  

> 225

} 

> 226 227

// Final 3D grid with split-K in z 

> 228

dim3 grid(grid_xy.x, grid_xy.y, split_k_slices);  

> 229

dim3 block(THREADS_PER_BLOCK);  

> 230 231

// Dynamic shared memory: per-warp region times number of warps  

> 232

size_t shmem_size = WARPS_PER_BLOCK * PER_WARP_SHARED_BYTES;  

> 233 234

// Workspace for partial accumulation (float)  

> 235

float* workspace = nullptr;  

> 236

size_t workspace_bytes = (size_t)M * (size_t)N * sizeof(float);  

> 237

cudaMalloc(&workspace, workspace_bytes);  

> 238

cudaMemset(workspace, 0, workspace_bytes);  

> 239 240

// Launch partial GEMM with split-K accumulation  

> 241

const int K_per_slice = (K + split_k_slices - 1) / split_k_slices;  

> 242

splitk_gemm_accumulate_kernel<<<grid, block, shmem_size>>>(  

> 243

static_cast<const __half*>(input), // A: [M x K]  

> 244

static_cast<const __half*>(weight), // B: [N x K] row-major (consumed as BˆT)  

> 245

workspace, // float accumulators  

> 246

M, N, K,  

> 247

K_per_slice  

> 248

);  

> 249 250

// Epilogue kernel: bias + ReLU + divide -> output half  

> 251

const int threads = 256;  

> 252

const int total_elems = M * N;  

> 253

const int blocks = (total_elems + threads - 1) / threads;  

> 254

epilogue_bias_relu_div_kernel<<<blocks, threads>>>(  

> 255

workspace,  

> 256

static_cast<const __half*>(bias),  

> 257

static_cast<__half*>(output),  

> 258

divisor,  

> 259

M, N

24 260 );  

> 261 262

// Cleanup  

> 263

cudaFree(workspace);  

> 264

cudaDeviceSynchronize();  

> 265

}

8.3 Level 3 Full Model Example (SqueezeNetFireModule) 

We provide a representative sample of K ERNEL BLASTER applied to more complex Level3 problems from KernelBench; this example includes a full implementation a SqueezeNet Fire Module. K ERNEL BLASTER optimizes over multiple kernels and kernel launches, demonstrating the capacity to optimize over more complex CUDA codebases, and achieving a speedup of 1.2 × over the PyTorch baseline. This implementation speeds up conv/pool/linear layers by assigning one CUDA block per output element and parallelizing the reduction dimension cooperatively across threads, then combining partial results with shuffle-based warp reductions and a lightweight block reduction via a per-warp shared-memory staging buffer. It reduces memory overhead by fusing bias and (when applicable) ReLU into the conv and linear kernels, uses restrict and force-inlined helpers to aid compilation, and routes most input/weight/bias reads through the read-only cache path ( ldg ). Computation is performed with FP16 storage and FP32 accumulation, avoiding extra reshape work by treating the post-pool tensor as a flattened vector by pointer aliasing.  

> 1

#include <cuda_runtime.h>  

> 2

#include <cuda_fp16.h>  

> 3

#include <stdint.h>  

> 4

#include <cstdio>  

> 5

#include <cmath>  

> 67

// Simple CUDA error checker (debugging aid)  

> 8

#ifndef NDEBUG  

> 9

#define CUDA_CHECK(x) do { cudaError_t err = (x); if (err != cudaSuccess) { \ 

> 10

fprintf(stderr, "CUDA error %s at %s:%d\n", cudaGetErrorString(err), __FILE__, __LINE__ ); abort(); } } while (0)  

> 11

#else  

> 12

#define CUDA_CHECK(x) x 

> 13

#endif  

> 14 15

// Constants  

> 16

#define WARP_SIZE 32  

> 17

#ifndef WPT  

> 18

#define WPT 4 

> 19

#endif  

> 20 21

inline int div_up_int(int a, int b) { return (a + b - 1) / b; } 

> 22

inline int div_up_int64(int64_t a, int64_t b) { return (int)((a + b - 1) / b); } 

> 23 24

// Helper: accumulate dot product of half2 pairs into float  

> 25

__device__ __forceinline__ void accumulate_half2_pair(const __half2 a, const __half2 b, float &acc) { 

> 26

float2 af = __half22float2(a);  

> 27

float2 bf = __half22float2(b);  

> 28

acc += af.x * bf.x + af.y * bf.y;  

> 29

} 

> 30 31

// Read-only cached load helpers  

> 32

template <typename T>  

> 33

__device__ __forceinline__ T ro_load(const T* ptr) { 

> 34

#if __CUDA_ARCH__ >= 350  

> 35

return __ldg(ptr);  

> 36

#else  

> 37

return *ptr;  

> 38

#endif  

> 39

}

25 40 41 // Vectorized load of two consecutive halfs as half2 with alignment check.  

> 42

// Fallback to two scalar loads if unaligned.  

> 43

__device__ __forceinline__ __half2 ro_load2_aligned(const half* base, int idx) { 

> 44

const half* p = base + idx;  

> 45

if ((((uintptr_t)p) & 0x3) == 0) { 

> 46

#if __CUDA_ARCH__ >= 350  

> 47

return __ldg(reinterpret_cast<const __half2*>(p));  

> 48

#else  

> 49

return *reinterpret_cast<const __half2*>(p);  

> 50

#endif  

> 51

} else { 

> 52

return __halves2half2(ro_load(base + idx), ro_load(base + idx + 1));  

> 53

} 

> 54

} 

> 55 56

// Aligned store of two halfs via half2 if aligned and within bounds; fallback otherwise.  

> 57

__device__ __forceinline__ void store2_aligned(half* base, int idx, __half2 v, int64_t limit) { 

> 58

half* p = base + idx;  

> 59

if ((((uintptr_t)p) & 0x3) == 0 && (int64_t)(idx + 1) < limit) { 

> 60

*reinterpret_cast<__half2*>(p) = v;  

> 61

} else { 

> 62

float2 vf = __half22float2(v);  

> 63

base[idx] = __float2half_rn(vf.x);  

> 64

if ((int64_t)(idx + 1) < limit) { 

> 65

base[idx + 1] = __float2half_rn(vf.y);  

> 66

} 

> 67

} 

> 68

} 

> 69 70

// Warp- and block-level reductions (sum and max)  

> 71

__device__ __forceinline__ float warpReduceSum(float val) { 

> 72

unsigned mask = 0xFFFFFFFFu;  

> 73

for (int offset = WARP_SIZE / 2; offset > 0; offset >>= 1) { 

> 74

val += __shfl_down_sync(mask, val, offset);  

> 75

} 

> 76

return val;  

> 77

} 

> 78

__device__ __forceinline__ float warpReduceMax(float val) { 

> 79

unsigned mask = 0xFFFFFFFFu;  

> 80

for (int offset = WARP_SIZE / 2; offset > 0; offset >>= 1) { 

> 81

val = fmaxf(val, __shfl_down_sync(mask, val, offset));  

> 82

} 

> 83

return val;  

> 84

} 

> 85 86

__device__ __forceinline__ float blockReduceSum(float val) { 

> 87

static __shared__ float smem[32]; // supports up to 32 warps per block  

> 88

int lane = threadIdx.x & (WARP_SIZE - 1);  

> 89

int wid = threadIdx.x / WARP_SIZE;  

> 90

val = warpReduceSum(val);  

> 91

if (lane == 0) smem[wid] = val;  

> 92

__syncthreads();  

> 93

float out = 0.f;  

> 94

if (wid == 0) { 

> 95

int numWarps = (blockDim.x + WARP_SIZE - 1) / WARP_SIZE;  

> 96

out = (lane < numWarps) ? smem[lane] : 0.f;  

> 97

out = warpReduceSum(out);  

> 98

} 

> 99

return out;  

> 100

} 

> 101 102

__device__ __forceinline__ float blockReduceMax(float val) { 

> 103

static __shared__ float smem[32]; // supports up to 32 warps per block 

26 104 int lane = threadIdx.x & (WARP_SIZE - 1);  

> 105

int wid = threadIdx.x / WARP_SIZE;  

> 106

val = warpReduceMax(val);  

> 107

if (lane == 0) smem[wid] = val;  

> 108

__syncthreads();  

> 109

float out = -INFINITY;  

> 110

if (wid == 0) { 

> 111

int numWarps = (blockDim.x + WARP_SIZE - 1) / WARP_SIZE;  

> 112

out = (lane < numWarps) ? smem[lane] : -INFINITY;  

> 113

out = warpReduceMax(out);  

> 114

} 

> 115

return out;  

> 116

} 

> 117 118

// Algorithmic-change optimized kernels: cooperative block reductions over reduction dimensions.  

> 119 120

// Conv2d NCHW with bias and ReLU, stride, padding; cooperative reduction across C_in*kH* kW  

> 121

__global__ void conv2d_nchw_bias_relu_reduce_kernel(  

> 122

const half* __restrict__ input, // [N, C_in, H, W]  

> 123

const half* __restrict__ weight, // [C_out, C_in, kH, kW]  

> 124

const half* __restrict__ bias, // [C_out]  

> 125

half* __restrict__ output, // [N, C_out, OH, OW]  

> 126

int N, int C_in, int H, int W,  

> 127

int C_out, int kH, int kW,  

> 128

int stride_h, int stride_w,  

> 129

int pad_h, int pad_w,  

> 130

int OH, int OW  

> 131

) { 

> 132

int tidx = blockIdx.x;  

> 133

if (tidx >= N * C_out * OH * OW) return;  

> 134 135

// Map linear index to (n, oc, oh, ow)  

> 136

int ow = tidx % OW; tidx /= OW;  

> 137

int oh = tidx % OH; tidx /= OH;  

> 138

int oc = tidx % C_out;  

> 139

int n = tidx / C_out;  

> 140 141

const int in_n_stride = C_in * H * W;  

> 142

const int in_c_stride = H * W;  

> 143

const int w_oc_stride = C_in * kH * kW;  

> 144

const int w_ic_stride = kH * kW;  

> 145 146

int in_h0 = oh * stride_h - pad_h;  

> 147

int in_w0 = ow * stride_w - pad_w;  

> 148 149

float acc = 0.f;  

> 150 151

const int R = C_in * kH * kW; // reduction length  

> 152

for (int r = threadIdx.x; r < R; r += blockDim.x) { 

> 153

int ic = r / (kH * kW);  

> 154

int rem = r % (kH * kW);  

> 155

int kh = rem / kW;  

> 156

int kw = rem % kW;  

> 157 158

int h_in = in_h0 + kh;  

> 159

int w_in = in_w0 + kw;  

> 160

if ((unsigned)h_in < (unsigned)H && (unsigned)w_in < (unsigned)W) { 

> 161

int in_idx = n * in_n_stride + ic * in_c_stride + h_in * W + w_in;  

> 162

int w_idx = oc * w_oc_stride + ic * w_ic_stride + kh * kW + kw;  

> 163

half hin = ro_load(&input[in_idx]);  

> 164

half hw = ro_load(&weight[w_idx]);  

> 165

acc += __half2float(hin) * __half2float(hw);  

> 166

}

27 167 } 

> 168 169

float sum = blockReduceSum(acc);  

> 170

if (threadIdx.x == 0) { 

> 171

sum += __half2float(ro_load(&bias[oc]));  

> 172

sum = sum < 0.f ? 0.f : sum;  

> 173

int out_idx = n * (C_out * OH * OW) + oc * (OH * OW) + oh * OW + ow;  

> 174

output[out_idx] = __float2half_rn(sum);  

> 175

} 

> 176

} 

> 177 178

// MaxPool2d NCHW without padding: cooperative reduction across kH*kW window  

> 179

__global__ void maxpool2d_nchw_reduce_kernel(  

> 180

const half* __restrict__ input, // [N, C, H, W]  

> 181

half* __restrict__ output, // [N, C, OH, OW]  

> 182

int N, int C, int H, int W,  

> 183

int kH, int kW,  

> 184

int stride_h, int stride_w,  

> 185

int OH, int OW  

> 186

) { 

> 187

int tidx = blockIdx.x;  

> 188

if (tidx >= N * C * OH * OW) return;  

> 189 190

int ow = tidx % OW; tidx /= OW;  

> 191

int oh = tidx % OH; tidx /= OH;  

> 192

int c = tidx % C;  

> 193

int n = tidx / C;  

> 194 195

int h_start = oh * stride_h;  

> 196

int w_start = ow * stride_w;  

> 197 198

float local_max = -INFINITY;  

> 199 200

const int in_n_stride = C * H * W;  

> 201

const int in_c_stride = H * W;  

> 202 203

const int R = kH * kW;  

> 204

for (int r = threadIdx.x; r < R; r += blockDim.x) { 

> 205

int kh = r / kW;  

> 206

int kw = r % kW;  

> 207 208

int h_in = h_start + kh;  

> 209

int w_in = w_start + kw;  

> 210

if ((unsigned)h_in < (unsigned)H && (unsigned)w_in < (unsigned)W) { 

> 211

int row_base = n * in_n_stride + c * in_c_stride + h_in * W;  

> 212

float v = __half2float(ro_load(&input[row_base + w_in]));  

> 213

local_max = fmaxf(local_max, v);  

> 214

} 

> 215

} 

> 216 217

float max_val = blockReduceMax(local_max);  

> 218

if (threadIdx.x == 0) { 

> 219

int out_idx = n * (C * OH * OW) + c * (OH * OW) + oh * OW + ow;  

> 220

output[out_idx] = __float2half_rn(max_val);  

> 221

} 

> 222

} 

> 223 224

// Linear: Y = ReLU(X * WˆT + b); cooperative reduction across K 

> 225

__global__ void linear_gemm_bias_relu_reduce_kernel(  

> 226

const half* __restrict__ X, // [N, K]  

> 227

const half* __restrict__ W, // [M, K]  

> 228

const half* __restrict__ bias, // [M]  

> 229

half* __restrict__ Y, // [N, M]  

> 230

int N, int M, int K 

> 231

) {

28 232 int tidx = blockIdx.x;  

> 233

if (tidx >= N * M) return;  

> 234 235

int m = tidx % M;  

> 236

int n = tidx / M;  

> 237 238

const half* x_ptr = X + n * K;  

> 239

const half* w_ptr = W + m * K;  

> 240 241

float acc = 0.f;  

> 242

for (int k = threadIdx.x; k < K; k += blockDim.x) { 

> 243

acc += __half2float(ro_load(&x_ptr[k])) * __half2float(ro_load(&w_ptr[k]));  

> 244

} 

> 245 246

float sum = blockReduceSum(acc);  

> 247

if (threadIdx.x == 0) { 

> 248

sum += __half2float(ro_load(&bias[m]));  

> 249

sum = sum < 0.f ? 0.f : sum;  

> 250

Y[n * M + m] = __float2half_rn(sum);  

> 251

} 

> 252

} 

> 253 254

// Linear: Y = X * WˆT + b; cooperative reduction across K (no activation)  

> 255

__global__ void linear_gemm_bias_reduce_kernel(  

> 256

const half* __restrict__ X, // [N, K]  

> 257

const half* __restrict__ W, // [M, K]  

> 258

const half* __restrict__ bias, // [M]  

> 259

half* __restrict__ Y, // [N, M]  

> 260

int N, int M, int K 

> 261

) { 

> 262

int tidx = blockIdx.x;  

> 263

if (tidx >= N * M) return;  

> 264 265

int m = tidx % M;  

> 266

int n = tidx / M;  

> 267 268

const half* x_ptr = X + n * K;  

> 269

const half* w_ptr = W + m * K;  

> 270 271

float acc = 0.f;  

> 272

for (int k = threadIdx.x; k < K; k += blockDim.x) { 

> 273

acc += __half2float(ro_load(&x_ptr[k])) * __half2float(ro_load(&w_ptr[k]));  

> 274

} 

> 275 276

float sum = blockReduceSum(acc);  

> 277

if (threadIdx.x == 0) { 

> 278

sum += __half2float(ro_load(&bias[m]));  

> 279

Y[n * M + m] = __float2half_rn(sum);  

> 280

} 

> 281

} 

> 282 283

// Public entry point used by the harness  

> 284

void launch_gpu_implementation(  

> 285

void* output,  

> 286

const void* input,  

> 287

const void* conv1_weight,  

> 288

const void* conv1_bias,  

> 289

const void* conv2_weight,  

> 290

const void* conv2_bias,  

> 291

const void* fc1_weight,  

> 292

const void* fc1_bias,  

> 293

const void* fc2_weight,  

> 294

const void* fc2_bias,  

> 295

const void* fc3_weight,  

> 296

const void* fc3_bias, 

29 297 int64_t batch_size,  

> 298

int64_t in_channels,  

> 299

int64_t in_h,  

> 300

int64_t in_w,  

> 301

// Conv1 params  

> 302

int64_t conv1_out_channels,  

> 303

int64_t conv1_kernel_h,  

> 304

int64_t conv1_kernel_w,  

> 305

int64_t conv1_stride_h,  

> 306

int64_t conv1_stride_w,  

> 307

int64_t conv1_pad_h,  

> 308

int64_t conv1_pad_w,  

> 309

// Pool params  

> 310

int64_t pool_kernel_h,  

> 311

int64_t pool_kernel_w,  

> 312

int64_t pool_stride_h,  

> 313

int64_t pool_stride_w,  

> 314

// Conv2 params  

> 315

int64_t conv2_out_channels,  

> 316

int64_t conv2_kernel_h,  

> 317

int64_t conv2_kernel_w,  

> 318

int64_t conv2_stride_h,  

> 319

int64_t conv2_stride_w,  

> 320

int64_t conv2_pad_h,  

> 321

int64_t conv2_pad_w,  

> 322

// Linear params  

> 323

int64_t fc1_in_features,  

> 324

int64_t fc1_out_features,  

> 325

int64_t fc2_out_features,  

> 326

int64_t fc3_out_features  

> 327

) { 

> 328

// Cast inputs to half pointers  

> 329

const half* x_in = static_cast<const half*>(input);  

> 330

const half* w1 = static_cast<const half*>(conv1_weight);  

> 331

const half* b1 = static_cast<const half*>(conv1_bias);  

> 332

const half* w2 = static_cast<const half*>(conv2_weight);  

> 333

const half* b2 = static_cast<const half*>(conv2_bias);  

> 334

const half* wfc1 = static_cast<const half*>(fc1_weight);  

> 335

const half* bfc1 = static_cast<const half*>(fc1_bias);  

> 336

const half* wfc2 = static_cast<const half*>(fc2_weight);  

> 337

const half* bfc2 = static_cast<const half*>(fc2_bias);  

> 338

const half* wfc3 = static_cast<const half*>(fc3_weight);  

> 339

const half* bfc3 = static_cast<const half*>(fc3_bias);  

> 340

half* y_out = static_cast<half*>(output);  

> 341 342

// Shapes and params  

> 343

const int N = static_cast<int>(batch_size);  

> 344

const int C0 = static_cast<int>(in_channels);  

> 345

const int H0 = static_cast<int>(in_h);  

> 346

const int W0 = static_cast<int>(in_w);  

> 347 348

const int C1 = static_cast<int>(conv1_out_channels);  

> 349

const int K1H = static_cast<int>(conv1_kernel_h);  

> 350

const int K1W = static_cast<int>(conv1_kernel_w);  

> 351

const int S1H = static_cast<int>(conv1_stride_h);  

> 352

const int S1W = static_cast<int>(conv1_stride_w);  

> 353

const int P1H = static_cast<int>(conv1_pad_h);  

> 354

const int P1W = static_cast<int>(conv1_pad_w);  

> 355 356

const int PKH = static_cast<int>(pool_kernel_h);  

> 357

const int PKW = static_cast<int>(pool_kernel_w);  

> 358

const int PSH = static_cast<int>(pool_stride_h);  

> 359

const int PSW = static_cast<int>(pool_stride_w);  

> 360 361

const int C2 = static_cast<int>(conv2_out_channels); 

30 362 const int K2H = static_cast<int>(conv2_kernel_h);  

> 363

const int K2W = static_cast<int>(conv2_kernel_w);  

> 364

const int S2H = static_cast<int>(conv2_stride_h);  

> 365

const int S2W = static_cast<int>(conv2_stride_w);  

> 366

const int P2H = static_cast<int>(conv2_pad_h);  

> 367

const int P2W = static_cast<int>(conv2_pad_w);  

> 368 369

const int FC1_K = static_cast<int>(fc1_in_features); // Expect 16*5*5 typically  

> 370

const int FC1_M = static_cast<int>(fc1_out_features); // 120  

> 371

const int FC2_M = static_cast<int>(fc2_out_features); // 84  

> 372

const int FC3_M = static_cast<int>(fc3_out_features); // num_classes  

> 373 374

// Derived dims (floor semantics)  

> 375

const int H1 = (H0 + 2 * P1H - K1H) / S1H + 1;  

> 376

const int W1 = (W0 + 2 * P1W - K1W) / S1W + 1;  

> 377 378

const int H1p = (H1 - PKH) / PSH + 1;  

> 379

const int W1p = (W1 - PKW) / PSW + 1;  

> 380 381

const int H2 = (H1p + 2 * P2H - K2H) / S2H + 1;  

> 382

const int W2 = (W1p + 2 * P2W - K2W) / S2W + 1;  

> 383 384

const int H2p = (H2 - PKH) / PSH + 1;  

> 385

const int W2p = (W2 - PKW) / PSW + 1;  

> 386 387

// Buffers for intermediates  

> 388

half *conv1_out = nullptr, *pool1_out = nullptr;  

> 389

half *conv2_out = nullptr, *pool2_out = nullptr;  

> 390

half *fc1_out = nullptr, *fc2_out = nullptr;  

> 391 392

size_t conv1_bytes = static_cast<size_t>(N) * C1 * H1 * W1 * sizeof(half);  

> 393

size_t pool1_bytes = static_cast<size_t>(N) * C1 * H1p * W1p * sizeof(half);  

> 394

size_t conv2_bytes = static_cast<size_t>(N) * C2 * H2 * W2 * sizeof(half);  

> 395

size_t pool2_bytes = static_cast<size_t>(N) * C2 * H2p * W2p * sizeof(half);  

> 396

size_t fc1_bytes = static_cast<size_t>(N) * FC1_M * sizeof(half);  

> 397

size_t fc2_bytes = static_cast<size_t>(N) * FC2_M * sizeof(half);  

> 398 399

CUDA_CHECK(cudaMalloc(&conv1_out, conv1_bytes));  

> 400

CUDA_CHECK(cudaMalloc(&pool1_out, pool1_bytes));  

> 401

CUDA_CHECK(cudaMalloc(&conv2_out, conv2_bytes));  

> 402

CUDA_CHECK(cudaMalloc(&pool2_out, pool2_bytes));  

> 403

CUDA_CHECK(cudaMalloc(&fc1_out, fc1_bytes));  

> 404

CUDA_CHECK(cudaMalloc(&fc2_out, fc2_bytes));  

> 405 406

// Choose cooperative-reduction block size  

> 407

const int threads = 128; // good balance for reductions on small K/R; adjust if needed  

> 408 409

// Conv1 + Bias + ReLU (cooperative reduction)  

> 410

{ 

> 411

int total = N * C1 * H1 * W1;  

> 412

int blocks = total;  

> 413

if (blocks < 1) blocks = 1;  

> 414

conv2d_nchw_bias_relu_reduce_kernel<<<blocks, threads>>>(  

> 415

x_in, w1, b1, conv1_out,  

> 416

N, C0, H0, W0,  

> 417

C1, K1H, K1W,  

> 418

S1H, S1W, P1H, P1W,  

> 419

H1, W1  

> 420

);  

> 421

CUDA_CHECK(cudaGetLastError());  

> 422

} 

> 423

// MaxPool1 (reads already-rectified conv1_out) - cooperative max reduction  

> 424

{ 

> 425

int total = N * C1 * H1p * W1p;  

> 426

int blocks = total; 

31 427 if (blocks < 1) blocks = 1;  

> 428

// Note: preserve original PSW special-case logic for first pool (as in source)  

> 429

maxpool2d_nchw_reduce_kernel<<<blocks, threads>>>(  

> 430

conv1_out, pool1_out,  

> 431

N, C1, H1, W1,  

> 432

PKH, PKW, PSH, PSH == 0 ? 1 : PSW,  

> 433

H1p, W1p  

> 434

);  

> 435

CUDA_CHECK(cudaGetLastError());  

> 436

} 

> 437 438

// Conv2 + Bias + ReLU (cooperative reduction)  

> 439

{ 

> 440

int total = N * C2 * H2 * W2;  

> 441

int blocks = total;  

> 442

if (blocks < 1) blocks = 1;  

> 443

conv2d_nchw_bias_relu_reduce_kernel<<<blocks, threads>>>(  

> 444

pool1_out, w2, b2, conv2_out,  

> 445

N, C1, H1p, W1p,  

> 446

C2, K2H, K2W,  

> 447

S2H, S2W, P2H, P2W,  

> 448

H2, W2  

> 449

);  

> 450

CUDA_CHECK(cudaGetLastError());  

> 451

} 

> 452

// MaxPool2 (reads already-rectified conv2_out) - cooperative max reduction  

> 453

{ 

> 454

int total = N * C2 * H2p * W2p;  

> 455

int blocks = total;  

> 456

if (blocks < 1) blocks = 1;  

> 457

maxpool2d_nchw_reduce_kernel<<<blocks, threads>>>(  

> 458

conv2_out, pool2_out,  

> 459

N, C2, H2, W2,  

> 460

PKH, PKW, PSH, PSW,  

> 461

H2p, W2p  

> 462

);  

> 463

CUDA_CHECK(cudaGetLastError());  

> 464

} 

> 465 466

// Flatten pool2_out [N, C2, H2p, W2p] to [N, K_flat] by pointer alias  

> 467

const int K_flat = C2 * H2p * W2p;  

> 468

(void)K_flat;  

> 469 470

// FC1: Fused GEMM + Bias + ReLU (cooperative reduction across K)  

> 471

{ 

> 472

int total = N * FC1_M;  

> 473

int blocks = total;  

> 474

if (blocks < 1) blocks = 1;  

> 475

linear_gemm_bias_relu_reduce_kernel<<<blocks, threads>>>(  

> 476

pool2_out, wfc1, bfc1, fc1_out,  

> 477

N, FC1_M, FC1_K  

> 478

);  

> 479

CUDA_CHECK(cudaGetLastError());  

> 480

} 

> 481 482

// FC2: Fused GEMM + Bias + ReLU (cooperative reduction across K)  

> 483

{ 

> 484

int total = N * FC2_M;  

> 485

int blocks = total;  

> 486

if (blocks < 1) blocks = 1;  

> 487

linear_gemm_bias_relu_reduce_kernel<<<blocks, threads>>>(  

> 488

fc1_out, wfc2, bfc2, fc2_out,  

> 489

N, FC2_M, FC1_M  

> 490

);  

> 491

CUDA_CHECK(cudaGetLastError()); 

32 492 } 

> 493 494

// FC3 -> output (no activation) (cooperative reduction across K)  

> 495

{ 

> 496

int total = N * FC3_M;  

> 497

int blocks = total;  

> 498

if (blocks < 1) blocks = 1;  

> 499

linear_gemm_bias_reduce_kernel<<<blocks, threads>>>(  

> 500

fc2_out, wfc3, bfc3, y_out,  

> 501

N, FC3_M, FC2_M  

> 502

);  

> 503

CUDA_CHECK(cudaGetLastError());  

> 504

} 

> 505 506

// Ensure kernels finish before freeing  

> 507

CUDA_CHECK(cudaDeviceSynchronize());  

> 508 509

// Free temporaries  

> 510

CUDA_CHECK(cudaFree(conv1_out));  

> 511

CUDA_CHECK(cudaFree(pool1_out));  

> 512

CUDA_CHECK(cudaFree(conv2_out));  

> 513

CUDA_CHECK(cudaFree(pool2_out));  

> 514

CUDA_CHECK(cudaFree(fc1_out));  

> 515

CUDA_CHECK(cudaFree(fc2_out));  

> 516

}

33