Title: SCI-Mamba: Unsupervised Learning based Low-Light Image Enhancement for Non-Cooperative Spacecraft

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.08033v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Jul 2026 00:28:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
# SCI-Mamba: Unsupervised Learning based Low-Light Image Enhancement for Non-Cooperative Spacecraft 

Yiyong Sun a, ∗, Weihang Shan a, Shijun Wei a, Diwei Zhou a, Guang Zhai a

> aSchool of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China

Abstract 

Low-light visual perception acts as the core visual foundation for on-orbit ser-vicing missions targeting non-cooperative spacecraft, supporting autonomous rendezvous, pose estimation, component detection and robotic capture oper-ations. Spaceborne imagery suffers from severe low-light degradation, while the extreme scarcity of paired normal/low-light space samples severely lim-its the generalization capacity of supervised enhancement algorithms. To address this practical bottleneck, this paper proposes SCI-Mamba, an unsu-pervised enhancement network for low-light orbital spacecraft observations. The proposed framework unites self-calibrated unsupervised learning, linear-complexity VMamba architecture and Retinex physical priors, delivering a lightweight enhancement pipeline adaptable to resource-limited spaceborne hardware. We construct Space Dark-1.0 , a dedicated low-light spacecraft dataset integrating real orbital footage, darkroom hardware-in-the-loop mea-surements and physically constrained synthetic data covering diverse illumi-nation, motion and attitude conditions. Comprehensive comparisons with CNN-, Transformer- and prevailing Mamba-based approaches verify the ad-vantages of SCI-Mamba in visual authenticity, color fidelity and inference speed. The proposed framework provides a practical low-light enhancement solution for close-proximity non-cooperative space operations. The code is available at https://github.com/bitswh/SCI-Mamba 

Keywords: Low-light image enhancement; SCI-Mamba; Unsupervised learning; Non-cooperative spacecraft.   

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email address: sunyy@bit.edu.cn (Yiyong Sun ) arXiv:2607.08033v1 [eess.IV] 9 Jul 2026

1. Introduction 

Low-light image enhancement is an indispensable preprocessing step for visual perception in non-cooperative spacecraft on-orbit servicing, directly determining the reliability of downstream tasks including autonomous ren-dezvous [1], pose estimation [2], key component detection [3] and robotic capture [4, 5]. Images captured under orbital low-illumination conditions suffer from composite degradation consisting of heavy sensor noise, local over-saturation and motion blur [6]. Moreover, paired low-light and normal-light images of spacecraft are extremely scarce, rendering supervised learning methods difficult to generalize. Therefore, developing paired-data-free unsu-pervised enhancement algorithms tailored for space imaging carries signifi-cant research and engineering value [7, 8, 9]. Traditional low-light enhancement methods built on hand-crafted priors mainly include histogram equalization, Gamma correction and Retinex de-composition. When deployed for dynamic, high-contrast orbital scenes with non-cooperative targets, these approaches suffer from weak scene adaptabil-ity, over-amplified background noise and severe color artifacts. Histogram equalization boosts global contrast via gray-scale mapping but simultane-ously magnifies sensor noise and induces highlight overexposure with lost tiny structural details. Gamma correction adjusts overall brightness through non-linear transformation yet fails to cope with complex, spatially varying orbital illumination, resulting in limited restoration gains. Retinex-based methods provide clear physical interpretability by separating illumination and reflectance components, yet the manually predefined regularization terms (illumination smoothness, reflectance sparsity) degrade robustness under dy-namically changing space lighting. In addition, division-based reflectance recovery under ultra-low light heavily amplifies noise, triggering noticeable color shifts and halo distortions [10, 11, 12]. With the development of deep learning, CNN-based unsupervised meth-ods have gained traction in low-light enhancement. The SCI framework intro-duces a self-calibrated illumination learning module to implement progressive illumination-reflectance decomposition with fast inference speed, and its up-graded variant SCI++ further strengthens model robustness via multi-stage self-calibration [8, 9]. Zero-DCE++ [13] formulates enhancement as high-order brightness curve estimation without requiring paired data. All of the above CNN-based methods eliminate dependence on matched light-dark im-age pairs and fit space data constraints well. Nevertheless, the fixed local 2receptive field of convolutional layers restricts global context modeling, lead-ing to uneven restoration effects in spacecraft scenes with extreme brightness gaps between vehicle bodies and dark cosmic backgrounds [14]. To overcome CNNs’ long-range modeling limitation, Transformer-based methods, by virtue of their self-attention mechanism, naturally possess global context modeling capabilities [15]. Uformer [16] adopts a U-shaped archi-tecture with locally enhanced windows, achieving promising performance in image restoration. LLFormer [17] designs attention-based brightness en-hancement and denoising modules tailored for ultra-high-definition low-light images. UHDformer [18] introduces correlation matching transformation for image enhancement. These attention-based models can dynamically redis-tribute feature weights according to regional brightness differences, matching the characteristic high contrast of space target imagery [11, 19]. However, the quadratic computational complexity of self-attention creates prohibitive computation and memory costs that exceed the strict power and hardware limits of spaceborne payloads. Even lightweight Transformer variants and sparse attention mechanisms cannot fundamentally eliminate the quadratic overhead induced by segmented high-resolution feature sequences [12]. Recently, the Mamba architecture, as a linear-complexity state-space model (SSM), has attracted significant attention, showing unique advantages in efficient sequence modeling, adaptive feature processing, and prediction within the aerospace domain [20, 21, 22]. Compared with Transformers, Mamba delivers competitive performance with lower computational cost; its selective mechanism can be viewed as an adaptive filter [23] that captures long-range dependencies while maintaining high efficiency [24]. VMamba [24] introduces a 2D selective scan (SS2D) mechanism that unfolds two-dimensional images into multiple one-dimensional sequences via four-directional cross-scanning and employs a selective SSM to capture long-range dependen-cies. Its computational complexity scales linearly with sequence length, sub-stantially outperforming the quadratic complexity of Transformers. In low-light enhancement, ECMamba [25] combines Retinex guidance with Mamba for pixel-level exposure correction, while WalMaFa [26] incorporates wavelet transform and frequency-domain adjustment. However, several limitations persist when applied to space target scenarios: existing visual Mamba ar-chitectures, like [24], require layer-wise alternating conversion between 2D feature maps and 1D sequences, which induces redundant computational cost and discontinuous spatial feature representation. Moreover, these meth-ods are primarily designed for ground scenes and have not been validated in 3space imaging scenarios; their effectiveness in differentiated enhancement of spacecraft targets versus deep-space backgrounds remains unexplored [6, 19]. Apart from algorithmic limitations, dedicated benchmark datasets for space low-light enhancement remain absent, hindering targeted research. Widely used orbital target datasets such as SISIFOS [27], SpaceSeg [28], SPEED [29], and SPEED+ [30] are designed exclusively for pose estima-tion tasks, consisting mostly of generic synthetic samples without authentic low-light orbital measurements. Spacecraft-DS [4] focuses on component seg-mentation and detection, without covering typical low-light orbital operat-ing environments. Ray-tracing-based space target datasets [31] can generate high-fidelity imagery, but due to the absence of hardware-in-the-loop cap-ture, they exhibit significant domain gaps from actual spaceborne cameras in terms of sensor noise and dynamic range [32]. To address the above challenges, this paper integrates the efficient un-supervised SCI++ framework [9] with the linear-complexity VMamba ar-chitecture [24], incorporates Retinex-based physical priors [10], and pro-poses SCI-Mamba - an unsupervised low-light enhancement method specif-ically tailored for non-cooperative spacecraft. We design a fully sequence-dominated pipeline that executes exactly one 2D-to-1D flattening at the in-put and one 1D-to-2D reconstruction at the output; all core illumination es-timation and self-calibration procedures operate purely within 1D sequence space to eliminate redundant cross-dimensional transformation overhead. A multi-objective joint loss suite is further proposed, equipped with a prior-guided illumination monitor that automatically generates target illumination maps from input brightness and gradient features to realize differentiated foreground-background enhancement. Furthermore, a dedicated low-light dataset is constructed, encompassing physically constrained synthetic im-ages, hardware-in-the-loop darkroom images, and real on-orbit imagery. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: • A sequence-inference-dominated enhancement architecture, SCI-Mamba, is proposed. The pipeline restricts cross-dimensional transformation to one forward and one reverse conversion only, avoiding redundant feature computation and boosting inference efficiency for low-power spaceborne hardware. Compared with the identical 2D-scan baseline SCI-Mamba(2D), the average inference frame rate improves by 23.05%. • A dedicated space low-light dataset, Space Dark-1.0 , is constructed. It contains physically constrained software-synthesized images, darkroom 4hardware-in-the-loop satellite model images, and real on-orbit images, filling the gap in specialized space low-light datasets. • A multi-objective loss function containing color fidelity and smoothness denoising is designed, in which the prior-guided illumination monitor module automatically generates a target illumination map from the brightness and gradient of the input image, guiding the network to focus on texture-rich regions for differentiated enhancement. • Comprehensive inference experiments conducted on the Space Dark-1.0 test set verify the adaptive enhancement capability of SCI-Mamba. Unlike CNN-based unsupervised competitors that indiscriminately am-plify noise in textureless background regions, our method achieves a balanced trade-off between targeted foreground enhancement and ef-fective background noise suppression for orbital scenes. In terms of inference speed, SCI-Mamba runs 18 .16 × and 4.61 × faster than EC-Mamba and WalMaFa, respectively. Compared with LLFlow, Uformer, LLFormer, and UHDformer, SCI-Mamba runs 3.89 ×, 8.67 ×, 9.49 ×,and 4.1× faster separately. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 elabo-rates on the proposed SCI-Mamba method, including the overall framework, the sequence-dominated cross-scan enhancement mechanism, and the VSS1D module. Section 3 introduces the multi-objective loss function, including the prior-guided illumination monitor. Section 4 describes the Space Dark-1.0 

dataset and the training process. Section 5 presents quantitative and quali-tative experimental comparisons against mainstream restoration algorithms. Section 6 concludes the paper and outlines future research directions. 

2. SCI-Mamba 

2.1. Overview 

The overall SCI-Mamba architecture is visualized in Figure 1. This framework integrates the self-calibrated enhancement mechanism of SCI++ with the efficient sequence modeling capability of VMamba, establishing a sequence-dominated enhancement architecture that fundamentally elimi-nates repeated cross-dimensional transformation. The layer-wise conversion overhead of conventional Mamba variants, as discussed in the introduction, 5Element-wise Division 

X Patch  

> X
> 2D-1D

Stage1 i1 Stage2 i2 Stage3 I3   

> 2D-1D Patch 2D-to-1D
> Conversion Rectification Patch_embed xy
> Element-wise Multiplication

X    

> x1x2
> Conv-2D
> 2D
> Convolution
> 0 1
> xˈ2ˆx3ˆX
> Conv-2D
> 1ˆx

Figure 1: Structure of the SCI-Mamba 

is fully resolved via our one-time bidirectional conversion design, rendering it adaptable to resource-limited spaceborne computation hardware. As shown in Figure 1, input image X0 first passes through a patch em-bedding layer to generate a downsampled low-resolution feature map X0,1. A single global 2D-to-1D flattening operation converts X0,1 into the 1D back-bone sequence x0,1 for all subsequent computations. Only at the final recon-struction stage will a single 1D-to-2D reshaping be executed; this one-time bidirectional conversion design avoids the layer-wise domain switching over-head adopted by existing visual Mamba variants. The network consists of three progressive illumination refinement stages, all performing feature propagation and optimization entirely in the sequence domain. 1. Stage 1 (Initial Illumination Estimation) : Receives the initial se-quence x0,1 and generates an initial illumination sequence i1. Sequence-domain Retinex enhancement is then applied to produce the initial enhanced sequence ˆx1, which is subsequently rectified via numerical truncation to yield x1.2. Stage 2 (Illumination Correction) : Introduces a self-calibration mechanism that performs long-range dependency modeling on the se-quence x1 output from Stage 1, generating a refined illumination es-timation sequence i2. Sequence-domain Retinex enhancement is again performed using the original sequence x0,1 as the basis, producing the corrected sequence x2.3. Stage 3 (Illumination Correction and Reconstruction) : Gener-ates the ultimate illumination sequence i3 based on the sequence x2.Image-domain Retinex enhancement is subsequently applied to produce 

X3, followed by a final 2D convolution that yields the ultimate output. The three stages are not merely cascaded enhancements but are centered on the progressive refinement of illumination estimation. This design enables 6the network to successively improve dark-region enhancement and detail re-covery while maintaining the physical constraints imposed by Retinex theory. The output sequences i1 and i2 from Stage 1 and Stage 2, together with the sequence x0,1, undergo sequence-domain Retinex enhancement to produce ˆx1

and ˆx2. These are then rectified to obtain the sequences x1 and x2, which serve as inputs to Stage 2 and Stage 3, respectively. The Rectification module primarily performs truncation within the [0 , 1] range. Retinex theory serves as the universal physical prior supporting all en-hancement operations in our pipeline. The standard image-domain Retinex recovery formulation is defined as [9, 11, 33]: 

ˆX3 = X0 ⊙ I◦(−1) 3 (1) where I◦(−1) 3 denotes the element-wise Hadamard inverse of the illumination map I3, and ⊙ represents element-wise Hadamard multiplication. To adapt Retinex decomposition to the sequence-domained pipeline, we extend the transformation into 1D sequence space for Stage 1 and Stage 2 processing 

ˆx1 = x0,1 ⊙ i◦(−1) 1 , ˆx2 = x0,1 ⊙ i◦(−1) 2 (2) All Retinex operations for intermediate refinement are completed in the 1D domain without frequent image-sequence switching, which is the core source of our pipeline’s computational efficiency gain. 

2.2. Stage-wise Enhancement Pipeline 2.2.1. Stage 1: Initial Illumination Estimation 

The architecture of Stage 1 is shown in Figure 2. This module undertakes coarse global illumination estimation from the flattened input sequence x0,1,relying on the proposed VSS1D module (detailed in Section 2.3.1) to extract long-range and local spatial features from low-light sequence data. After VSS1D feature extraction, linear projection and Sigmoid activation generate raw illumination compensation sequence i1,0. Element-wise sum-mation with original x0,1 and [0 , 1] clipping produces the initial illumination estimation i1, which integrates original brightness information with global contextual compensation modeled by VSS1D. We then execute sequence-domain Retinex enhancement following (2), and rectify the output value range to get Stage 1 intermediate sequence x1 fed into Stage 2. 7i10 1 

# x ˈ VSS1D GELU Linear Sigmoid Linear 

Stage1:Initial Illumination Estimation         

> VSS1D 1-D Visual State-Space Linear Linear Layer GELU Gaussian Error Linear Units gelus Sigmoid Sigmoid function Element-wise Addition

## i1,0 

Figure 2: Structure of Stage 1 

2.2.2. Stage 2: Illumination Correction 

Figure 3 illustrates the self-calibration refinement module of Stage 2. Dis-tinct from Stage 1’s single-input illumination generation logic, this stage ac-cepts both the enhanced intermediate x1 and illumination estimation i1 from the prior stage, inheriting the multi-stage paradigm of SCI++ [9]. 

# i2x1

# i1    

> VSS1D GELU Linear Linear
> VSS1D GELU Linear Linear
> LN
> LN
> Linear
> Linear

## Stage2: Illumination Correction  

> LN Layer Normalization

# i2,0 

# i2,1 

Figure 3: Structure of Stage 2 

The input x1 passes through layer normalization, linear projection and two stacked VSS1D units to derive two hierarchical illumination correction terms i2,0, i 2,1. Summation of these two terms with Stage 1’s i1, followed by value clipping, yields refined illumination sequence i2. To avoid progressive error accumulation across cascaded stages, Retinex enhancement is always computed against the original base sequence x0,1 rather than refined x1. The resulting ˆx2 undergoes range rectification to generate x2, the input feature sequence for Stage 3 reconstruction. This design prevents error propagation from Stage 1 intermediate outputs into subsequent illumination estimation. 82.2.3. Stage 3: Illumination Correction and Reconstruction 

The final reconstruction module is displayed in Figure 4. Its illumination refinement sub-process shares identical VSS1D-based optimization logic with Stage 2, taking x2 and implicit prior i2 to compute the ultimate 1D illumi-nation sequence i3 after truncation. The key functional difference lies in the additional cross-dimensional transformation reconstruction branch unique to Stage 3. 

# I3x2

# i2    

> VSS1D GELU Linear Linear
> VSS1D GELU Linear Linear
> LN
> LN
> Linear
> Linear
> Conv-2D

# i3

Stage3:Illumination Correction and Reconstruction  

> Conv-2D 2D Convolution
> 1D-2D

# i3,0 

# i3,1  

> 1D-2D 1D-to-2D Conversion

Figure 4: Structure of Stage 3 

The 1D sequence i3 is reshaped into a 2D patch grid via the pipeline’s sole 1D-to-2D cross-dimensional transformation operation. Successive upsam-pling and 2D convolution recover full-resolution illumination map I3 aligned with input X0. Image-domain Retinex transformation (1) is applied on raw input X0 using I3, and a terminal convolutional layer generates the final enhanced output image X3.

2.3. Sequential State-space Modeling in 1D 

Standard VMamba [24] and Transformer-based restoration networks, such as Uformer [16], LLFormer [17], and UHDformer [18], operate on 2D fea-ture maps, requiring layer-wise 2D-to-1D flattening and inverse reshaping for SSM/self-attention computation. Repeated cross-dimensional transfor-mation between image grids and 1D sequences introduces heavy redundant computation and breaks continuous spatial feature representation, severely limiting real-time inference speed for low-power hardware. To resolve this in-trinsic flaw, we design the VSS1D module family including SCSG and SCSR sub-units. SCSG generates four directional scan sequences within 1D ten-sors, while SCSR fuses multi-path features back to row-major order without reconstructing 2D feature maps. 92.3.1. VSS1D 

We redesign the original VMamba VSS block into VSS1D, a residual-form module customized for flattened 1D patch sequences, as visualized in Fig-ure 5. Unlike the original 2D VSS that processes grid-shaped feature maps and triggers repeated layer-wise cross-dimensional transformation, VSS1D receives the single global flattened sequence x0,1 after patch embedding, elim-inating repeated domain switching between layers.         

> LN Linear Split Transpose
> Transpose Conv1d
> SiLU
> SiLU SCSG Mamba_ssm SCSR
> Transpose Linear

VSS1D:1-D Visual State-Space             

> Split Feature-gate branch separation Transpose Sequence-channel rearrangement SiLU Sigmoid Linear Unit Conv1d 1D Convolution SCSG Sequential Cross-scan Generator SCSR Sequential Cross-scan Restorer
> Mamba_ssm Selective State-space Modeling

SS1D 

> m

z

> sq

z

> g

z

z

> in

v

> out

v

> m

v

> g

v

Figure 5: Structure of VSS1D 

Let the input sequence be vin ∈ RB×N ×D. The forward propagation formula of VSS1D is 

vout = vin + SS1D (LN( vin )) , (3) where LN( ·) denotes layer normalization, SS1D( ·) is the embedded 1D se-lective scan core, and vout ∈ RB×N ×D denotes module output. The residual shortcut retains raw sequence features to mitigate gradient instability in deep multi-stage propagation. SS1D serves as the core spatial modeling sub-block inside VSS1D. After layer normalization, input features are linearly expanded and split into two parallel branches: spatial state modeling branch vm and adaptive gating branch vg

vm, v g = Split (Linear (LN( vin ))) , (4) The spatial branch first applies transposition, 1D convolution and SiLU acti-vation to strengthen local adjacent pixel correlations in the flattened sequence 

zm = SiLU (Conv1D (Transpose( vm))) . (5) A single-direction scanning sequence fails to capture horizontal, vertical, and reverse spatial relationships inherited from the original 2D patch grid. We 10 therefore embed the SCSG generator inside the spatial branch to produce four directional scan sequences purely from 1D data, detailed in Section 2.3.3. Each directional sequence from SCSG is fed into Mamba_ssm selective state-space modeling to capture long-range cross-patch dependencies under independent propagation paths. After SSM computation, the SCSR restora-tion module (Section 2.3.5) unifies all directional feature sequences back to the original row-major order and executes balanced feature fusion 

zsq = SCSR (Mamba _ssm (SCSG ( zm))) , (6) Simultaneously, the gating branch processes split vg via transposition and SiLU to generate adaptive modulation weights 

zg = SiLU (Transpose( vg)) . (7) Element-wise multiplication between spatial modeling output zsq and gating response zg filters redundant useless features and highlights structural texture information 

z = zsq ⊙ zg, (8) Finally, transposed linear projection recovers the original feature dimension for SS1D output 

SS1D(LN( vin )) = Linear (Transpose( z)) , (9) This SS1D output is added back to residual input vin to produce final VSS1D sequence vout .In summary, VSS1D inherits Mamba’s linear-complexity long-sequence modeling capacity, while compensating the lost multi-directional spatial in-formation after image flattening via embedded SCSG/SCSR units. It pro-vides spatially aware stable sequence representations for all three illumination refinement stages. 

2.3.2. From SS2D to SS1D Sequence Modeling 

VMamba’s native SS2D module constructs four directional scan sequences from intact 2D feature maps, capturing multi-orientation spatial correlations via row/column forward/reverse traversal, as illustrated in Figure 6. 11 u1

u2

u3

u4

y2

y3

y4

yMerge  

> Starting Scan Equal-weight
> merge
> 1
> y

y1               

> Merge
> 1, 11, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
> kkkkkkkkk

h A h B u y C h Du  

> +

= += +               

> 3, 13, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3,
> kkkkkkkkk

h A h B u y C h Du  

> +

= += +               

> 2, 12, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2,
> kkkkkkkkk

h A h B u y C h Du  

> +

= += +               

> 4, 14, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4,
> kkkkkkkkk

h A h B u y C h Du  

> +

= += +        

> b(1,1 )b(1,2 )b(1,w p)b(1,w p-1 )
> b(2,1 )b(2,2 )b(2,w p)b(2,w p-1 )
> b(hp-1,1 )b(hp-1,2 )b(hp-1, wp)
> b(hp,1 )b(hp,2 )b(hp,wp)b(hp,wp-1 )

## ... 

## ... ... ... ... 

> ...
> ... ...

Figure 6: Illustration of the 1D Sequential Cross-scan Mechanism 

Let b(i, j ) denote feature vector at row i, column j of the patch grid, with grid dimensions hp (height) and wp (width). SS2D generates four comple-mentary traversal sequences 

u1 : b(1 , 1) , b (1 , 2) , ..., b (1 , w p), b (2 , 1) , ..., b (2 , w p), ..., b (hp, 1) , ..., b (hp, w p)

u2 : b(1 , 1) , b (2 , 1) , ..., b (hp, 1) , b (1 , 2) , ..., b (hp, 2) , ..., b (1 , w p), ..., b (hp, w p)

u3 : b(hp, w p), b (h, w p − 1) , ..., b (hp, 1) , b (hp − 1, w p), ..., b (hp − 1, 1) ,..., b (1 , w p), ..., b (1 , 1) 

u4 : b(h, w p), b (h − 1, w p), ..., b (1 , w p), b (h, w p − 1) , ..., b (1 , w p − 1) ,..., b (hp, 1) , ..., b (1 , 1) 

(10) Each sequence captures complementary horizontal/vertical/reverse contex-tual cues to overcome single-direction modeling bias. As analyzed in Section 2, conventional SS2D introduces cumulative transformation overhead when stacked; it requires every module to receive 2D grid inputs and execute in-ternal flattening/recovery operations. Our SCI-Mamba pipeline flattens the image once at input; repeatedly reconstructing 2D maps inside each module would violate our sequence-dominated design philosophy and incur unneces-sary computation. We therefore design SS1D, which generates, models and fuses four directional sequences entirely inside 1D data without temporary 2D grid recovery. The detailed generation and restoration logic are separated into SCSG and SCSR submodules below. 12 2.3.3. Sequential Cross-scan Generator: SCSG 

Although zm is formatted as a single flattened 1D vector, its internal pixel order strictly follows row-major patch grid arrangement. Direct single-path SSM scanning cannot extract vertical and reverse structural dependen-cies, so SCSG rearranges the base sequence into four independent directional traversal streams within the 1D domain. Define πsp (·) as the row-major to column-major permutation operation compatible with patch grid dimensions, and Rev( ·) as full sequence reversal. The four scan sequences generated by SCSG are u1 = zm,u2 = πsp (zm),u3 = Rev( u1),u4 = Rev( u2).

(11) 

u1, u 2, u 3, u 4 correspond to row-forward, column-forward, row-reverse, column-reverse traversal respectively. SCSG stacks the four streams along a tempo-rary direction dimension and merges it into batch dimension for parallel batched Mamba SSM computation; this rearrangement only modifies tensor axis organization without altering feature values or introducing extra train-able weights. It supplements vertical and reverse spatial context for the flattened sequence while maintaining the 1D-only computation paradigm. 

2.3.4. Selective State-space Modeling 

Four directional sequences output by SCSG are processed in parallel by the Mamba_ssm selective state-space unit. The discrete state transition dynamics for each stream i at step k are defined as 

{ hi,k +1 = Ai,k hi,k + Bi,k ui,k 

yi,k = Ci,k hi,k + Du i,k 

, for i = 1 , . . . , 4 (12) where hi,k ∈ RN denotes the hidden state vector of the i-th sequence at step k, ui,k ∈ RCh is the input feature vector at step k of the i-th sequence 

ui, Ch denotes the channel dimension, and yi,k ∈ RCh is the output feature vector at step k of the i-th sequence. D is optional and typically set to 0. 

¯A = diag( −1, −2, . . . , −N) ∈ RN ×N is a fixedly initialized diagonal matrix in the continuous domain. The discretized state transition matrix Ai,k is 

Ai,k = exp (∆i,k · ¯A) ∈ RN ×N (13) 13 where exp( ·) denotes the exponential operation applied element-wise to ma-trices or scalars. The dynamic parameters Bi,k , Ci,k , and ∆i,k are uniformly generated from the input via shared linear layers: 

Bi,k = WB · ui,k ,Ci,k = WC · ui,k ,

∆i,k = Wdt · (W∆ · ui,k ) + b∆.

(14) The time step coefficient ∆i,k ∈ R is passed through the Softplus function with range constraints to obtain a stable positive time step: 

∆i,k = Clamp (Softplus (∆ i,k ) , ∆min , ∆max ) (15) where Softplus( ·) ensures positivity, defined as Softplus( x) = log (1 + exp( x)) .

∆min and ∆max denote the lower and upper bounds of the time step coeffi-cient, respectively. Enforcing positivity and range constraints prevents the state update step from being too small, which would impede effective context propagation, or too large, which could destabilize state transitions, thereby enhancing the numerical stability of the selective state-space scanning pro-cess. The linear layer is computed as Linear( x) = W x + b, where W is the weight matrix matching the input dimension and b is the bias vector. All four sequences share the same set of linear layer parameters; however, due to different inputs ui,k , their respective dynamic parameters Bi,k , Ci,k , and ∆i,k 

are mutually independent. In summary, after the four-direction cross-scan sequences undergo Mamba selective state-space modeling as in (12), the corresponding four groups of output features are obtained: 

yi = Mamba _ssm ( ui) , i = 1 , . . . , 4 (16) where y1, y2, y3, and y4 represent the row-forward, column-forward, row-reverse, and column-reverse feature sequences, respectively. These four re-sponses remain in their respective scanning orders and cannot be directly fused; they must be unified under a common encoding sequence. In this work, the SCSR module restores all four sequences to the row-major coor-dinate system. The directional recovery and fusion process is detailed in Section 2.3.5. The Mamba module establishes long-range dependencies along different scanning directions, enabling information exchange between distant sequence 14 elements through state recurrence. For low-light space target images, this mechanism captures contextual relationships among spacecraft local struc-tures, deep-space backgrounds, and regions of varying illumination while maintaining linear complexity, thereby providing global structural informa-tion for subsequent illumination correction and reflectance recovery. 

2.3.5. Sequential Cross-scan Restorer: SCSR 

After Mamba SSM processing, four directional outputs y1, y 2, y 3, y 4 follow inconsistent pixel permutation orders, which will break spatial alignment if fused directly. SCSR reverses SCSG’s permutation operations and unifies all streams back to the original row-major sequence layout before balanced feature fusion. Row-direction features are combined by summing forward row stream y1 and reversed row-reverse stream Rev (y3)

yrow = y1 + Rev ( y3) (17) Column-direction temporary features integrate column-forward y2 and re-versed column-reverse y4

y′ 

> col

= y2 + Rev ( y4) (18) 

y′ 

> col

remains column-major ordered, so we apply inverse permutation π−1 

> sp

to restore row-major layout 

ycol = π−1 

> sp

(y′

> col

) . (19) Final fused sequence averages normalized row and column branch outputs to balance multi-direction spatial information 

zsq = 1

4 (yrow + ycol ) . (20) The unified fusion formula combining all four streams is 

zsq = Merge ( y1, y 2, y 3, y 4) = 1

4

[y1 + Rev ( y3) + π−1 

> sp

(y2 + Rev ( y4)) ] (21) Unlike SS2D’s strategy of recovering full 2D maps before fusion, SCSR com-pletes all coordinate realignment and averaging fully inside 1D sequence space, maintaining the pipeline’s single-flatten design and eliminating ex-tra grid reconstruction overhead. The fused zsq enters element-wise gating modulation and linear projection to generate SS1D output. 15 2.4. Inference Flowchart 

We summarize the complete end-to-end inference procedure of SCI-Mamba in Algorithm 1. The textual description below only introduces the high-resolution downsampling optimization strategy; detailed step-by-step opera-tions are fully encapsulated within the pseudocode without repetitive verbal restatement. 

Algorithm 1 SCI-Mamba Network Flowchart (Inference) 

Require: Low-light input image X0 ∈ RH×W ×3; pretrained network param-eters 

Ensure: Enhanced image X3 ∈ RH×W ×3 

> 1:

Generate Xl 

> 0

via long-side constrained proportional resizing  

> 2:

Step 1: Patch Embedding & Unique 2D-to-1D Conversion  

> 3:

F0 ← PatchEmbed( X0) ⊲ Downsampled feature grid h × w × C 

> 4:

x0,1 ← Flatten( F0) ⊲ Only one global flatten operation  

> 5:

Step 2: Stage 1 – Initial Illumination Estimation  

> 6:

z1 ← VSS1D( x0,1) ⊲ Global multi-direction context extraction  

> 7:

c1 ← σ( Linear( z1)) ⊲ Pixel-wise illumination compensation  

> 8:

i1 ← x0,1 + c1 ⊲ Coarse illumination sequence  

> 9:

ˆx1 ← x0,1 ⊙ i◦(−1) 1 ⊲ 1D Retinex enhancement, Eq. (2)  

> 10:

x1 ← Rectify(ˆ x1) 

> 11:

Step 3: Stage 2 – Self-calibrated Illumination Refinement  

> 12:

i2 ← SCSG ( VSS1D( x1)) ⊲ Multi-path spatial modeling  

> 13:

ˆx2 ← x0,1 ⊙ i◦(−1) 2 ⊲ Retinex based on raw base sequence  

> 14:

x2 ← Rectify(ˆ x2) 

> 15:

Step 4: Stage 3 – Reconstruction Branch  

> 16:

i3 ← VSS1D( x2) ⊲ Final 1D illumination sequence  

> 17:

I3 ← Reshape( i3) ⊲ Only one global 1D-to-2D recovery  

> 18:

I3 ← UpSample( I3) ⊲ Recover full input resolution  

> 19:

ˆX3 ← X0 ⊙ I◦(−1) 3 ⊲ Image-domain Retinex, Eq. (1)  

> 20:

X3 ← Conv2D ( Rectify( ˆX3)) ⊲ Final refinement convolution  

> 21:

return X3

To reduce memory and computation consumption for ultra-high-resolution inputs, we adopt long-side constrained resizing: if the longer dimension of in-put X0 exceeds the preset threshold (512 pixels), we proportionally shrink the image while preserving original aspect ratio; otherwise the raw resolution is 16 retained. The network core predicts low-resolution illumination maps on the scaled smaller input, then upsamples the illumination map back to original dimensions for Retinex decomposition with the unmodified high-resolution raw image. This split design balances inference latency and original texture preservation. 

3. Loss Functions 

We construct a five-term weighted multi-objective total loss to jointly con-strain color distortion, spatial smoothness, RGB channel balance, structural fidelity and targeted differential enhancement for space foreground/background. The unified total loss formulation is 

Loss total =

> 5

∑

> k=1

αk Loss k, (22) where αk denotes the weight coefficient balancing the contribution of each sub-loss during end-to-end training. Each loss term targets distinct degrada-tion artifacts in orbital low-light imagery, with clear functional differentiation detailed separately below. 

3.1. Illumination Color Constancy Loss 

The illumination color constancy loss ( Loss 1) constrains RGB channel balance on the intermediate illumination sequences i1, i 2, i 3 generated by the three stages. Physically, illumination maps represent scene light intensity distribution and should not carry inherent color bias. This term penalizes channel mean divergence of each stage’s illumination sequence to suppress color shift introduced during sequence-domain Retinex decomposition 

Loss 1 =

> 3

∑

> s=1

β1,s 

√

(μs,r − μs,g )2 + ( μs,r − μs,b )2 + ( μs,g − μs,b )2 (23) 

β1,s denotes stage-specific weight; μs,r , μ s,g , μ s,b are channel-wise mean values of stage-s illumination sequence is. Note that this loss operates exclusively on illumination intermediate features, differing fundamentally from Loss 3 which regularizes the final enhanced output image’s channel balance. 17 3.2. Smoothness Loss[9] 

The smoothness loss ( Loss 2) enforces natural spatial continuity on the final enhanced image X3 with structure-adaptive weighting derived from raw input X0. For flat, textureless deep-space background regions, strong smooth regularization suppresses amplified sensor noise; for spacecraft edges and structural textures, regularization weight decays automatically to avoid over-blurring critical detail 

Loss 2 = 1

h · w

> h

∑

> i=1
> w

∑

> j=1

∑

> (k,l )∈Di,j

wk,l (i, j ) |X3(i + k, j + l) − X3(i, j )| (24) where h, w represent output image height and width; Di,j defines pixel offset set within a (2 ζ +1) ×(2 ζ +1) local neighborhood excluding center coordinate 

Di,j = {(k, l ) | k, l ∈ [−ζ, ζ ] ∩ Z, (k, l ) 6 = (0 , 0) , 1 ≤ i + k ≤ h, 1 ≤ j + l ≤ w} .

(25) Structure-aware weight wk,l (i, j ) is calculated in YCrCb color space from input local color differences: 

wk,l (i, j ) = exp 

(

−

∑  

> c∈{ Y,C r,C b}

(C0,c (i + k, j + l) − C0,c (i, j )) 2

2σ2

> s

)

, (26) When adjacent pixels share nearly identical YCrCb values (flat background), 

wk,l (i, j ) → 1 to strengthen smooth penalty; large color gradients at edges reduce weight to preserve structural sharpness. 

3.3. RGB Relative Response Constraint Loss 

The RGB relative response constraint loss ( Loss 3) directly regularizes the final enhanced image X3 to retain the original input’s RGB proportional bal-ance, preventing unnatural color distortion while allowing reasonable overall brightness adjustment. Distinct from Loss 1 (constraining illumination maps), this loss targets pixel-level channel ratios of the visible output 

Loss 3 = 1

3h · w

∑

> p

∑

> c∈{ r,g,b }

|RX3,c (p) − RX0,c (p)| (27) Per-pixel relative channel response for arbitrary image X is defined as: 

RX,c (p) = Xc(p)

¯X(p) + ε3

(28) 

¯X(p) denotes average RGB intensity at pixel p, and tiny constant ε3 =1 × 10 −3 prevents division-by-zero numerical overflow. 18 3.4. Fidelity Loss [9] 

The Fidelity Loss ( Loss 4) restricts structural deviation between each stage’s intermediate enhanced sequence and the raw low-light input, elim-inating extreme over-enhancement or geometric distortion in the absence of paired well-exposed supervision 

Loss 4 = 1

3h · w

> 3

∑

> s=1

∑

> p

∑

> c∈{ r,g,b }

β4,s (Xs,c (p) − X0,c (p)) 2 (29) 

β4,s assigns progressive weight to each stage’s intermediate output Xs, pe-nalizing large pixel-wise divergence from raw input X0.

3.5. Prior-guided Illumination Monitor 

The prior-guided illumination monitor ( Loss 5) is the core task-oriented loss customized for space foreground-background differentiation. It dynam-ically generates a target illumination guidance map IX0 purely from input brightness and gradient features without manual labeling: texture-rich space-craft regions receive low target illumination values (strong Retinex enhance-ment), while smooth dark cosmic backgrounds are assigned high target illu-mination to suppress noise amplification. The loss computes mean absolute error between each stage’s single-channel illumination map and the auto-generated guidance map 

Loss 5 = 1

h · w

> 3

∑

> s=1

∑

> p

β5,s |Gray (Is(p)) − IX0 (p)| (30) where β5,s is the stage-wise weight for the fifth loss term. Grayscale con-version formula for RGB illumination map P follows standard luminance weights 

Gray (P ) = 0 .299 PR + 0 .587 PG + 0 .114 PB (31) The target illumination guidance map IX0 integrates two self-extracted masks: bright-region map Xbright and texture feature map Xtexture , with separate weights for dark-texture and bright-texture spacecraft areas 

IX0 = 1 − [λd (1 − Xbright ) Xtexture + λbXbright Xtexture ] (32) 

λd = 1 .35 (dark texture weight), λb = 0 .12 (bright texture weight); term (1 −

Xbright )Xtexture marks shadowed spacecraft structures, while Xbright Xtexture 

labels illuminated satellite surfaces. The construction pipelines for Xbright 

and Xtexture are detailed sequentially below. 19 3.5.1. Xbright Computation 

Two prior guidance maps Xbright and Xtexture are constructed to weight the multi-objective loss, which are derived from luminance and gradient features respectively. The bright-region guidance map segments high-brightness pixels from smoothed input luminance 

Xbright (p) = Gσb

( ˜Y (p) − Tb

Pb − Tb

)

(33) 

˜Y is denoised luminance after grayscale conversion, median filtering and Gaussian smoothing: 

˜Y = Gσy (Median ( Gray (X0(p)))) 

Otsu adaptive threshold scaled by coefficient αb sets brightness segmentation boundary: 

Tb = αb Otsu 

( ˜Y

)

Pb = 99 .5% denotes the 99.5th percentile luminance value as upper softening bound for bright pixels. 

3.5.2. Xtexture Computation 

The texture guidance map quantifies local structural confidence via gra-dient magnitude and morphological segmentation 

Xtexture (p) = [ Ms(p) ( θ0 + θ1Es(p))] (34) 

θ0 = 0 .45 baseline structural confidence, θ1 = 0 .55 gradient enhancement weight; Ms is smoothed soft region mask derived from morphological pro-cessed edge seed map E0:

Ms = Gσf (Mf ) (35) Hard structural mask Mf is generated via cascaded morphological operations on raw edge seeds: 

Mf = Close (AreaOpen (Dilate (Fill (Close (Dilate( E0)))) , A min )) (36) Operations sequence: dilation → closing → hole filling → area opening (re-move tiny isolated noise regions with area < A min = 300 ) → secondary clos-ing. Edge seed map E0 binarizes normalized gradient magnitude via Otsu 20 thresholding: 

E0(p) = 

{

1, if ̂ Gostu (p) ≥ αg,

0, if ̂ Gostu (p) < α g

(37) ̂

Gostu = Otsu( ̂ G), gradient threshold coefficient αg = 0 .82 . Normalized gra-dient magnitude: ̂

G = G − min( G)

max( G) − min( G) (38) Raw gradient magnitude from smoothed luminance ˜Y :

G =

√(

∇x ˜Y

)2

+

(

∇y ˜Y

)2

(39) Soft edge confidence map Es smooths normalized gradient within structural mask boundaries: 

Es(p) = Gσe

[(̂ 

G(p) − Pl

Ph − Pl + ǫ

)

Mf (p)

]

, (40) 

Pl = 85% , P h = 99% are lower/upper gradient percentiles, σe = 0 .6 Gaussian smooth width. Algorithm 2 encapsulates the complete offline pipeline to compute Loss 5

without repetitive verbal restatement in main text. 

4. Dataset and Training 

4.1. Space Dark-1.0 Dataset 

Existing orbital target datasets are optimized for pose estimation segmen-tation tasks and lack authentic low-light orbital measurements, as summa-rized in Section 1. To resolve this data shortage for space low-light enhance-ment research, we construct the hybrid benchmark Space Dark-1.0 integrat-ing three complementary data sources that jointly mitigate synthetic-to-real domain gaps: 1. Physically constrained synthetic satellite renders generated via Unreal Engine, following accurate space illumination laws and material reflectance parameters to cover diverse orbital lighting, attitude and motion states (4700 images); 2. Ground darkroom hardware-in-the-loop captures of scaled satellite models, reproducing real sensor noise and dynamic range characteristics of spaceborne optical payloads (2600 images); 3. Authentic 21 Algorithm 2 Prior-guided Illumination Monitor Calculation 

Require: Input image X0; multi-stage illumination sequences i1, i2, i3; hy-perparameters λd, λ b, α b, α g

Ensure: Target illumination monitoring loss Loss 5 

> 1:

Upsample i1, i 2, i 3 to input resolution and convert to single-channel gray illumination maps via Eq. (31)  

> 2:

Compute smoothed luminance ˜Y from X0 following grayscale and filter-ing pipeline  

> 3:

Generate bright-region guidance map Xbright using Eq. (33)  

> 4:

Calculate gradient magnitude map G of ˜Y (Eq. (39))  

> 5:

Normalize gradient to obtain ̂ G (Eq. (38))  

> 6:

Binarize normalized gradient into edge seed map E0 via Otsu threshold  

> 7:

Execute cascaded morphological transforms on E0 to derive structural mask Mf 

> 8:

Smooth Mf to generate soft region support map Ms 

> 9:

Compute soft edge confidence map Es masked by Mf 

> 10:

Fuse Ms and Es to construct texture guidance map Xtexture  

> 11:

Combine Xbright and Xtexture to generate target illumination map IX0 

> 12:

Compute MAE loss between stage-wise gray illumination maps and IX0

to obtain Loss 5 

> 13:

return Loss 5

22 real orbital footage of H-IIA upper stage collected by Astroscale ADRAS-J public mission (2100 images). The full dataset totals 9400 images, forming the dedicated benchmark for unsupervised low-light enhancement targeting non-cooperative orbital tar-gets, providing multi-domain training and test samples that simultaneously cover synthetic simulation, semi-physical ground verification and real orbital operating environments. 

4.2. Training Process 

Orbital satellite imagery exhibits limited color diversity, which may bias color correction modules during training. We supplement our primary train-ing set with external public low-light datasets for balanced color distribution: 1600 randomly sampled frames from ExDark [34], 8000 samples from Space Dark-1.0 , and 2400 orbital target images from SPEED+ [30]. The model is trained end-to-end under the five-term joint loss defined in (22); loss compu-tation relies on intermediate stage sequences during training, while inference strips auxiliary loss branches and retains only the lightweight all-sequence forward pipeline for speed. Training hardware specifications: Intel Xeon Gold 6130 CPU paired with single NVIDIA Tesla V100-PCIE-32GB GPU. The model is implemented based on PyTorch 2.0.1, CUDA 11.8, cuDNN 8.7.0 with NVIDIA driver version 580.65.06. All critical hyperparameters corresponding to formulas defined in prior sections are given below. The patch embedding module adopts a patch size of 4, generating feature grids with dimension H/ 4 × W/ 4. For the VSS1D module formulated in (3), the input sequence channel dimension D = 64 and Mamba hidden state dimension dstate = 16 . The 1D convolution kernel in (5) is set to 1 × 3, and the linear expansion factor for feature splitting in (4) equals 2. The time step clipping bounds in (15) are assigned as ∆min = 1 × 10 −5, ∆max = 0 .1.For the total joint loss (22), the balancing coefficients are set as α1 =0.006 , α2 = 0 .003 , α3 = 0 .25 , α4 = 0 .006 , α5 = 2 .2. Stage-wise weights for illumination color constancy loss (23): β1,1 = 0 .50 , β 1,2 = 0 .75 , β 1,3 =1.00 ; Stage-wise weights for fidelity loss (29): β4,1 = 0 .50 , β 4,2 = 0 .75 , β 4,3 =1.00 ; Stage-wise weights for prior-guided illumination monitor (30): β5,1 =0.50 , β 5,2 = 0 .75 , β 5,3 = 1 .00 . The smoothness loss (24) uses neighborhood radius ζ = 2 and Gaussian smoothing coefficient σs = 10 . A tiny constant 

ε3 = 1 × 10 −3 is adopted to avoid division overflow in RGB relative response loss (28). Coefficients for the illumination guidance map construction in 23 Algorithm 2, (32) – (34) are set as follows: λd = 1 .35 , λ b = 0 .12 , α b =0.78 , σ b = 0 .8, σ y = 0 .6, P b = 99 .5% , θ 0 = 0 .45 , θ 1 = 0 .55 , σ f = 1 .2, A min =300 , α g = 0 .82 , σ e = 0 .6. The generated target illumination map IX0 is clamped within the range [0 .1, 1.0] , with gradient percentile thresholds Pl =85% , P h = 99% .We adopt the AdamW optimizer with initial learning rate 1 × 10 −4 and weight decay 1×10 −4. The batch size is 4 with 2-step gradient accumulation, and the training process runs for a total of 500 epochs. The learning rate schedule includes a linear warm-up phase within the first 5 epochs (warm-up ratio from 0.2 to 1.0), followed by cosine annealing that decays the learning rate down to 5 × 10 −6. Gradient clipping with maximum norm 1.0 is ap-plied to stabilize training, and the global random seed is fixed to 2 for full experimental reproducibility. Table 1 compares training overhead metrics between our SCI-Mamba and three representative unsupervised space-suitable enhancement methods. The comparison focuses purely on training resource consumption, without mix-ing inference performance data detailed in Section 5. SCI-Mamba’s training                

> Table 1: Training Overhead Comparison Across Unsupervised Enhancement Algorithms
> Metrics Training Time (s) Peak Memory (MB) Max. / Avg. GPU Utilization
> SCI++ 337915.12 1593.02 65.00% , 24.37% Zero-DCE++ 95240.62 1974.31 92.00% , 29.76% RUAS 747616.60 415.59 39.00% , 11.63%
> SCI-Mamba (ours) 371553.58 1657.21 60.00% , 24.99%

time and peak memory footprint are comparable to SCI++, without obvi-ous training efficiency advantages over lightweight CNN-based unsupervised competitors. The core performance gain of our architecture manifests during real-time inference, demonstrated comprehensively in the following experi-mental section. 

5. Inference Experiment 

We conduct comprehensive comparative experiments covering three main-stream algorithm families: CNN, Transformer and Mamba. The competing methods include SCI++ [9], Zero-DCE++ [13], RUAS [35], ECMamba [25], WalMaFa [26], LLFlow [36], Uformer [16], LLFormer [17], and UHDformer [18]. The test set includes 1400 unseen disjoint samples of the Space Dark-1.0 .24 All models run on identical hardware to eliminate platform bias. Multiple warm-up forward propagations are executed before recording latency to ex-clude overhead of CUDA initialization and cache preloading. The measured frame rate covers the full pipeline including resizing, padding and model for-ward inference, while image storage and debug logs are excluded to reflect real on-orbit processing latency for spaceborne payloads. To verify the efficiency gain brought by our core one-time bidirectional 2D-to-1D/1D-to-2D conversion design, we build an ablation variant SCI-Mamba(2D). It shares identical loss functions, training strategies and three-stage illumination refinement pipeline with the proposed SCI-Mamba, while replacing our dedicated 1D-only VSS1D module with the original layer-wise 2D SS2D scanning from VMamba [24]. We adopt four quantitative met-rics to comprehensively evaluate model deployment potential: average in-ference FPS, peak GPU memory consumption, theoretical GFLOPs and to-tal trainable parameters (in millions). The parameter count is defined as 

Params = ∑ 

> θt∈Θ

numel( θt), where Θ represents the collection of all train-able weight tensors. Figure 7 provides boxplots of inference speed across multi-resolution test images. As intuitively illustrated, lightweight CNN methods achieve the highest raw frame rates, yet they suffer severe visual distortion on high-contrast orbital scenes as validated in subsequent qualitative results. All Transformer and existing Mamba competitors incur excessive memory over-head and extremely low inference speed, whereas our proposed SCI-Mamba achieves a dominant speed advantage against all these heavyweight restora-tion models. Full quantitative inference statistics are summarized in Table 2. Ablation comparison between SCI-Mamba and its 2D baseline clearly val-idates the efficiency improvement of our all-sequence architecture: the aver-age inference FPS rises from 45.59 to 56.10, delivering a 23.05% speedup. This significant acceleration stems from the one-time bidirectional cross-dimensional transformation design analyzed in Section 2, which removes the layer-wise conversion bottleneck of conventional VMamba pipelines. Al-though lightweight CNN models yield faster inference, their poor restoration quality on space imaging restricts practical on-orbit deployment. In con-trast, all competing Mamba and Transformer models face fatal hardware limitations for spaceborne platforms: ECMamba consumes up to 19232 MB peak memory, WalMaFa reaches 4304 MB, and all Transformer variants oc-cupy gigabyte-level video memory, far exceeding the limited memory budget 25 Figure 7: Inference Frame Rate Boxplot for Multi-resolution Test Pictures Table 2: Quantitative Inference Performance Comparison 

Methods Avg. FPS Peak Mem. (MB) GFLOPs Params (M) 

SCI++ 936.04 225.00 0.57 2.29 × 10 −2

Zero-DCE++ 223.76 3683.59 184.42 7.92 × 10 −2

RUAS 149.80 273.63 1.71 3.44 × 10 −3

ECMamba 3.09 19232.76 184.04 1.99 WalMaFa 12.16 4304.04 482.56 11.63 LLFlow 14.39 2392.08 112.86 5.43 Uformer 6.47 8768.03 715.64 50.88 LLFormer 5.91 1027.09 1166.94 24.55 UHDformer 13.64 2223.67 12.09 3.39 × 10 −1

SCI-Mamba(2D) 45.59 763.57 3.17 4.55 × 10 −1

SCI-Mamba(ours) 56.10 394.58 4.74 3.85 × 10 −1

26 of satellite embedded computing units. In terms of computational cost and model scale, SCI-Mamba only gen-erates 1/38.8 GFLOPs of ECMamba and 1/101.8 GFLOPs of WalMaFa; its parameter volume is merely 1/5.2 and 1/30.2 of the two mainstream Mamba competitors, respectively. For inference speed, our method runs 

18 .16 × faster than ECMamba and 4.61 × faster than WalMaFa. Compared with Transformer baselines Uformer, LLFormer and UHDformer, our speed gains range from 4.1× to 9.6×, achieving real-time processing capability un-available for traditional attention-based models. More importantly, our peak GPU memory is only 394.58 MB, which is an order of magnitude lower than all Mamba/Transformer competitors, making it highly compatible with low-power spaceborne hardware.                                     

> Table 3: No-reference image quality assessment metrics (lower = better quality)
> Methods NIQE BRISQUE PIQE
> Raw Input 20.21 54.98 54.17
> SCI++ 22.03 64.53 70.44 Zero-DCE++ 24.64 56.38 58.54 RUAS 24.65 61.92 72.12 ECMamba 21.87 51.64 72.39 WalMaFa 20.63 69.15 75.73 LLFlow 24.75 63.93 77.38 Uformer 22.24 91.62 86.27 LLFormer 20.27 66.57 69.80 UHDformer 21.57 70.72 75.92
> SCI-Mamba(ours) 20.39 56.71 54.62

We adopt three authoritative no-reference image quality metrics with-out well-exposed orbital ground truth for perceptual evaluation: NIQE [37], BRISQUE [38], PIQE [39]. Smaller metric values correspond to less image distortion and more natural visual characteristics: 1. NIQE: Evaluates con-sistency with natural image statistical distribution to measure overall scene authenticity; 2. BRISQUE: Quantifies structural damage, noise amplification and over-enhancement artifacts from spatial natural statistics; 3. PIQE: De-tects local block distortion across the whole image to reflect micro perceptual quality. From Table 3, we analyze the comprehensive visual performance of SCI-Mamba against all peers: 1. NIQE: SCI-Mamba achieves a competitive NIQE score (20.39), ranking second only to LLFormer (20.27) among all 27 competing methods, while substantially outperforming all CNN-based and most Transformer/Mamba baselines. This indicates that our enhancement introduces minimal unnatural brightness or color bias to orbital imagery. 2. BRISQUE: Although ECMamba achieves the lowest BRISQUE score (51.64), its 19GB memory footprint precludes satellite deployment. Zero-DCE++ attains a comparable BRISQUE of 56.38, yet produces severe visual artifacts as demonstrated in the qualitative results. SCI-Mamba’s BRISQUE of 56.71 strikes a practical balance between visual fidelity and hardware feasibility. 3. PIQE: Our result (54.62) is marginally higher than the unprocessed input (54.17), yet it ranks far superior to every enhancement baseline. This proves SCI-Mamba avoids block artifacts during targeted foreground enhancement for spacecraft targets. Synthesizing efficiency metrics and blind image quality results, existing CNN models run fast but produce severely distorted space images; Trans-former and traditional Mamba methods deliver limited visual improvement while suffering prohibitive memory and computational overhead incompat-ible with on-orbit devices. By contrast, our SCI-Mamba uniquely achieves three advantages simultaneously: lightweight hardware footprint, fast real-time inference, and high-fidelity targeted enhancement for non-cooperative spacecraft, which satisfies the strict constraints of spaceborne visual percep-tion systems. To comprehensively validate the generalization and practical restoration capability of SCI-Mamba, we perform qualitative visual evaluations over three heterogeneous subsets from Space Dark-1.0 , corresponding to synthetic virtual orbital images, darkroom hardware-in-the-loop shots and real on-orbit footage. The three test domains cover simulated scenes, ground semi-physical verification data and authentic space imagery, which fully reflect the domain shift between rendering data and actual spaceborne imagery. We compare our approach with all CNN-, Transformer- and Mamba-based competitors adopted in the quantitative evaluation, and analyze their performance from target detail reconstruction, background noise suppression, color consistency and anti-saturation perspectives respectively. 

5.1. Test on Virtual Pictures 

We first conduct evaluations on the synthetic image subset of Space Dark-1.0 . Figure 8 and Figure 9 visualize the restoration outputs of all competing algorithms under simulated orbital illumination conditions. 28 For moderately dim synthetic scenes with hidden satellite shown in Fig-ure 8, the raw input already outlines spacecraft hull and solar panels, yet shadowed zones, faint textures, and tiny bottom components remain ob-scured. Transformer-based methods Uformer and LLFormer produce overly conservative outputs that leave dark-region details unresolved. CNN-based unsupervised methods (SCI++, Zero-DCE++, RUAS) perform global bright-ness elevation, yet lack targeted recovery of subtle structures, resulting in uneven illumination across foreground and background. LLFlow and UHD-former suffer from over-enhancement artifacts, while Mamba competitors ECMamba and WalMaFa generate over-intense light responses, triggering highlight saturation on satellite surfaces and distorting geometric authentic-ity. By contrast, SCI-Mamba selectively brightens spacecraft regions with-out lifting the overall brightness of dark cosmic backgrounds. Solar panel outlines, hull edges and miniature structural features are clearly recovered. This observation verifies that our model avoids naive global stretching; in-stead, it adaptively modulates illumination according to spatial texture and brightness statistics, retaining natural target-background radiometric con-trast while boosting target visibility. We further validate lower-light synthetic samples in Figure 9, where the satellite body is nearly buried in black background with severely degraded so-lar panel contours and edges. SCI++ partially brightens the satellite hull but fails to recover fine structures, leaving significant dark regions under-exposed. Zero-DCE++, RUAS and LLFormer introduce prominent grain noise after enhancement. ECMamba, WalMaFa, LLFlow and UHDformer drastically raise global brightness, simultaneously amplifying background noise and in-troducing unnatural color casts, which turn the inherently dark space back-ground into mottled gray or chromatic artifacts. Uformer fails to deliver suf-ficient light compensation, making satellite structures barely distinguishable. The SCI-Mamba recovers complete satellite hull, solar panels and fine edge contours under lower illumination. The model imposes strong attenuation on texture-free background areas and prevents erroneous noise amplification, which is consistent with the design intention of the prior-guided illumina-tion monitor. This loss module is expected to drive the network to allocate enhancement weights preferentially to texture-rich spacecraft regions, match-ing the intrinsic imaging characteristic of orbital scenes: sparse foreground targets against uniform dark backgrounds. 29 Input SCI-Mamba(ours)       

> SCI++ Zero-DCE++ RUAS
> ECMamba WalMaFa LLFlow Uformer LLFormer UHDformer

Figure 8: Visual Comparison on Synthetic Virtual Orbital Picture - with Hidden Satellite 

30 Input SCI-Mamba(ours)       

> SCI++ Zero-DCE++ RUAS
> ECMamba WalMaFa LLFlow Uformer LLFormer UHDformer

Figure 9: Visual Comparison on Synthetic Virtual Orbital Images - Lower Light Picture 

31 5.2. Test on Real Pictures 

We proceed to hardware-in-the-loop darkroom tests using scaled satellite models. Real captured data contains more complex composite degradation including sensor noise, uneven lighting, local specular highlights and faint textures, which provides stricter testing of noise suppression, color correc-tion and structural preservation capacity. Comparative visual results are illustrated in Figure 10 and Figure 11. In moderately dark darkroom images (Figure 10), the raw input exhibits dim overall intensity with blurred solar panels, hull edges and supporting brackets. SCI++ and RUAS partially lift brightness but fail to restore shad-owed tiny details, leading to local under-enhancement. Zero-DCE++, EC-Mamba, LLFlow and UHDformer amplify background sensor noise and in-troduce unnatural reddish-purple color artifacts inconsistent with physical space imaging. WalMaFa brightens the satellite hull but inevitably elevates background noise levels. LLFormer and Uformer generate weak enhancement effects; as quantified in Table 2, their inference speed is an order of magni-tude slower than SCI-Mamba. SCI-Mamba selectively strengthens structural features of satellites while suppressing invalid background brightening, yield-ing clearer target outlines and maintaining a relatively dim cosmic backdrop. This demonstrates the superior foreground-background discrimination and noise suppression capability of our pipeline, achieving a balanced tradeoff among brightness improvement, color fidelity and structural integrity. Figure 11 presents lower light hardware-captured samples with extremely low hull luminance. Under such harsh conditions, most baseline methods tend to exaggerate background noise during brightness compensation. SCI++, Uformer and LLFormer still output underexposed imagery with invisible satellite fine structures. Zero-DCE++, ECMamba, WalMaFa, LLFlow, and UHDformer all boost global intensity at the cost of amplified background noise; LLFlow and UHDformer additionally suffer severe purple color shifts and local overexposure that break visual plausibility. SCI-Mamba steadily improves satellite brightness while preserving continuous edge and texture information, without widespread noise proliferation across the background. The method demonstrates strong adaptability to real sensor-induced noise and uneven illumination artifacts beyond synthetic datasets. 

5.3. Test with On-orbit Spacecraft Pictures 

Real orbital footage contains more complex degradation sources including local specular reflections, shadow occlusion, uneven background luminance 32 SCI++ ECMamba Uformer Zero-DCE++ WalMaFa LLFormer RUAS LLFlow UHDformer 

## Input 

## SCI-Mamba(ours) 

Figure 10: Visual Comparison on Darkroom Hardware-in-the-loop Satellite Picture 

SCI++ ECMamba Uformer Zero-DCE++ WalMaFa LLFormer RUAS LLFlow UHDformer 

## Input 

## SCI-Mamba(ours) 

Figure 11: Visual Comparison on Darkroom Captured Satellite Picture 

33 and sensor noise, which directly reflect the practical deployment value of enhancement pipelines for spaceborne visual perception. Comparative results on authentic on-orbit imagery are shown in Figure 12 and Figure 13. For moderately illuminated orbital targets (Figure 12), raw images show recognizable satellite bodies yet heavy shadows, blurred edges and indistinct local textures. SCI++ and Uformer produce insufficient compensation, leav-ing critical fine details hidden in dark zones. RUAS, ECMamba and UHD-former overexpose reflective satellite surfaces and cause highlight clipping. Zero-DCE++, WalMaFa and LLFormer introduce widespread background noise while brightening targets and degrade natural image statistics. LLFlow generates obvious strip and block artifacts that disrupt continuous structural representation. In contrast, SCI-Mamba brightens satellite regions while fully retaining hull contours and surface textures, avoiding highlight saturation on reflective components and effectively restraining background noise growth. The stable illumination correction and structural retention capacity of our method supply high-quality preprocessed inputs for downstream tasks such as target detection, pose measurement and component identification. Figure 13 evaluates challenging scenes featuring small-scale orbital tar-gets and irregular background brightness fluctuations. SCI++, Uformer and LLFormer cannot deliver adequate enhancement for faint miniature satellites, resulting in inconspicuous foreground objects. Zero-DCE++ and RUAS im-prove target visibility yet lack effective suppression of uneven background in-terference, weakening target-background radiometric separation. ECMamba, WalMaFa, LLFlow and UHDformer drastically amplify background lumi-nance and noise, accompanied by overexposure or color distortion on target surfaces; LLFlow and UHDformer additionally exhibit severe purple color shifts, while ECMamba and WalMaFa produce noticeable grain noise and uneven brightness distribution. SCI-Mamba significantly boosts the visi-bility of tiny spacecraft while keeping background regions dim and noise-suppressed, without simultaneous amplification of irrelevant bright back-ground areas. This cross-dimensional generalization performance proves that the proposed pipeline transfers reliably from synthetic simulation and ground semi-physical datasets to authentic orbital data. Overall, across synthetic, darkroom hardware and real on-orbit three categories of low-light space im-agery, SCI-Mamba consistently exhibits targeted foreground enhancement, effective background noise suppression, stable structural preservation and reliable color consistency, making it a feasible enhancement solution for close-proximity non-cooperative space perception missions. 34 Input       

> SCI-Mamba(ours) SCI++ Zero-DCE++ RUAS
> ECMamba WalMaFa LLFlow Uformer LLFormer UHDformer
> Figure 12: Visual Comparison on Medium-bright Real On-orbit Spacecraft Picture

The quantitative indicators and qualitative comparison in this section support the validity of the SCI-Mamba proposed in this paper: 1. The one-time bidirectional dimension conversion scheme and VSS1D module cut redundant computation. Measured FPS and memory consumption data con-firm the lightweight and high-inference efficiency characteristic of the pro-posed network. 2. The multi-source dataset Space Dark-1.0 provides multi-domain test samples. Stable visual performance on synthetic, semi-physical and real data verifies the rationality of the constructed benchmark. 3. The multi-objective loss function with prior-guided illumination monitor is de-signed to facilitate differentiated enhancement of spacecraft foreground and space background. Visual results indicate that the proposed loss mitigates the common artifacts of mainstream unsupervised methods. 35 Input 

SCI-Mamba(ours) SCI++ Zero-DCE++ RUAS ECMamba WalMaFa LLFlow 

Uformer LLFormer UHDformer 

> Figure 13: Visual Comparison on Small-size On-orbit Spacecraft Picture

6. Conclusion 

We propose SCI-Mamba, an unsupervised low-light enhancement net-work tailored for non-cooperative orbital targets. By integrating the self-calibration mechanism of SCI++, linear-complexity VMamba state-space modeling and Retinex physical priors, this fully sequence-dominated pipeline avoids repeated cross-dimensional transformation overhead of conventional restoration architectures. Instead of alternating 2D/1D conversion per layer, SCI-Mamba performs a single global flattening at input and a single recon-struction at output, with all core illumination estimation and refinement operations processed in 1D sequence domain. The three-stage progressive 36 refinement workflow is regularized by a multi-term weighted loss function, where a prior-guided illumination monitor adaptively weights enhancement strength for textured spacecraft foreground and smooth dark background. To address the scarcity of real low-light orbital data, we build the hybrid bench-mark Space Dark-1.0 , which aggregates synthetic, ground hardware-in-the-loop and real on-orbit samples to support unsupervised training. Compre-hensive ablation and comparative experiments across synthetic, semi-physical and real orbital scenes demonstrate that SCI-Mamba achieves a favorable trade-off between visual quality, noise suppression and hardware efficiency. Its lightweight computational footprint and fast inference make it well-suited as a preprocessing module for embedded spaceborne vision platforms servic-ing non-cooperative spacecraft. Future research directions are outlined as follows: 1. Lighten the sequence modeling backbone to adapt the model for miniature, low-power spaceborne computing hardware. 2. Expand the single-image enhancement framework to video tasks, leveraging temporal information to stabilize brightness and eliminate orbital motion blur. 3. Perform end-to-end joint training with downstream spacecraft pose estimation and component detection modules to build a unified space vision system. 

Reference References 

[1] I. G. Velentzas, P. Tsiotras, Irolsd: Illumination robust line segment de-tection for spacecraft relative navigation, Acta Astronautica 239 (2026) 148–161. [2] J. Peng, W. Xu, L. Yan, E. Pan, B. Liang, A.-G. Wu, A pose mea-surement method of a space noncooperative target based on maximum outer contour recognition, IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Elec-tronic Systems 56 (1) (2019) 512–526. [3] S. Khalil, Z. Wang, N. Aouf, Hybrid deep learning based monocular pose estimation for autonomous space docking operations, Acta Astronautica 238 (Part B) (2025) 612–629. [4] Y. Cao, J. Mu, X. Cheng, F. Liu, Spacecraft-ds: A spacecraft dataset for key components detection and segmentation via hardware-in-the-loop capture, IEEE Sensors Journal 24 (4) (2024) 5347–5358. 37 [5] W. Xu, B. Liang, Y. Xu, Survey of modeling, planning, and ground ver-ification of space robotic systems, Acta Astronautica 68 (11-12) (2011) 1629–1649. [6] T. H. Park, S. D’Amico, Adaptive neural-network-based unscented kalman filter for robust pose tracking of noncooperative spacecraft, Jour-nal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics 46 (9) (2023) 1671–1688. [7] C. Zhao, H. Wang, Q. Yan, J. Zhang, Y. Zhu, J. Sun, Y. Zhang, A review of optical image enhancement for extreme space environments, Advances in Astronautics 8 (2) (2025) 171–199. [8] L. Ma, T. Ma, R. Liu, X. Fan, Z. Luo, Toward fast, flexible, and robust low-light image enhancement, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 5637–5646. [9] L. Ma, T. Ma, C. Xu, J. Liu, X. Fan, Z. Luo, R. Liu, Learning with self-calibrator for fast and robust low-light image enhancement, IEEE Trans-actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 47 (10) (2025) 9095–9112. [10] N. An, L. Ma, G. Han, X. Fan, R. Liu, Striving for faster and better: A one-layer architecture with auto re-parameterization for low-light image enhancement, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 35 (8) (2025) 7455–7470. 

doi:10.1109/TCSVT.2025.3547029 .[11] Y. Cai, H. Bian, J. Lin, H. Wang, R. Timofte, Y. Zhang, Retinexformer: One-stage retinex-based transformer for low-light image enhancement, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2023, pp. 12504–12513. [12] J. Bai, Y. Yin, Q. He, Y. Li, X. Zhang, Retinexmamba: Retinex-based mamba for low-light image enhancement, in: International Conference on Neural Information Processing, Springer, 2024, pp. 427–442. [13] C. Li, C. Guo, C. C. Loy, Learning to enhance low-light image via zero-reference deep curve estimation, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 44 (8) (2021) 4225–4238. 38 [14] W. Wang, H. Yang, J. Fu, J. Liu, Zero-reference low-light enhancement via physical quadruple priors, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024, pp. 26057–26066. [15] Z. Feng, Y. Jiang, Y. Yang, X. Guo, H. Zhao, Q. Cao, Dmat: Dynamic modality-adaptive transformer for infrared-visible space object identifi-cation, Acta Astronautica (2026). [16] Z. Wang, X. Cun, J. Bao, W. Zhou, J. Liu, H. Li, Uformer: A gen-eral u-shaped transformer for image restoration, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 17683–17693. [17] T. Wang, K. Zhang, T. Shen, W. Luo, B. Stenger, T. Lu, Ultra-high-definition low-light image enhancement: A benchmark and transformer-based method, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, Vol. 37, 2023, pp. 2654–2662. [18] C. Wang, J. Pan, W. Wang, G. Fu, S. Liang, M. Wang, X.-M. Wu, J. Liu, Correlation matching transformation transformers for uhd im-age restoration, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 38, 2024, pp. 5336–5344. [19] H. Wang, X. Yan, X. Hou, J. Li, Y. Dun, K. Zhang, Division gets better: Learning brightness-aware and detail-sensitive representations for low-light image enhancement, Knowledge-Based Systems 299 (2024) 111958. [20] S. H. Ahmad, J. H. Kai, S. M. H. U. Hassan, B. I. Rabiu, Aircraft engine fault diagnosis using a mamba-bigru model with perturbation strategy, Aerospace Science and Technology (2026) 111988. [21] J. She, Y. Liu, R. Zhou, N. Qi, Joint multi-target detection and single-target tracking framework for vehicles tracking based on uav, Aerospace Science and Technology (2026) 111625. [22] C. Ge, J. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Wang, J. Yao, T. Yang, J. Du, Pc-transformer: Probabilistic flight trajectory prediction with multi-stage predictive coding, Aerospace Science and Technology (2025) 110910. [23] A. Gu, T. Dao, Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces, arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752 (2023). 39 [24] Y. Liu, Y. Tian, Y. Zhao, H. Yu, L. Xie, Y. Wang, Q. Ye, J. Jiao, Y. Liu, Vmamba: Visual state space model, Advances in neural information processing systems 37 (2024) 103031–103063. [25] W. Dong, H. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Chen, Ecmamba: Consolidating selective state space model with retinex guidance for efficient multiple exposure correction, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems 37 (2024) 53438–53457. [26] J. Tan, S. Pei, W. Qin, B. Fu, X. Li, L. Huang, Wavelet-based mamba with fourier adjustment for low-light image enhancement, in: Proceed-ings of the Asian conference on computer vision, 2024, pp. 3449–3464. [27] I. G. Velentzas, J.-D. Florez Castillo, N. Bruckner, M. Dor, P. Tsiotras, Sisifos: Specialized illumination simulator for orbiting spacecraft, in: AIAA SCITECH 2026 Forum, 2026, p. 2597. [28] H. Liu, P. Guo, S. Yang, Z. Jiang, Q. Hu, D. Li, Spaceseg: Ahigh-precision intelligent perception segmentation method for multi-spacecraft on-orbit targets, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11133 (2025). [29] M. Kisantal, S. Sharma, T. H. Park, D. Izzo, M. Märtens, S. D’ Amico, Satellite pose estimation challenge: Dataset, competition design, and results, IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 56 (5) (2020) 4083–4098. [30] T. H. Park, M. Märtens, G. Lecuyer, D. Izzo, S. D’Amico, Speed+: Next-generation dataset for spacecraft pose estimation across domain gap, in: 2022 IEEE aerospace conference (AERO), IEEE, 2022, pp. 1– 15. [31] M. Bechini, M. Lavagna, P. Lunghi, Dataset generation and validation for spacecraft pose estimation via monocular images processing, Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 358–369. [32] P. F. Proença, Y. Gao, Deep learning for spacecraft pose estimation from photorealistic rendering, in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, 2020, pp. 6007–6013. [33] X. Yi, H. Xu, H. Zhang, L. Tang, J. Ma, Diff-retinex++: Retinex-driven reinforced diffusion model for low-light image enhancement, IEEE 40 Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 47 (8) (2025) 6823–6841. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3563612 .[34] Y. P. Loh, C. S. Chan, Getting to know low-light images with the ex-clusively dark dataset, Computer vision and image understanding 178 (2019) 30–42. [35] R. Liu, L. Ma, J. Zhang, X. Fan, Z. Luo, Retinex-inspired unrolling with cooperative prior architecture search for low-light image enhancement, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 10561–10570. [36] Y. Wang, R. Wan, W. Yang, H. Li, L.-P. Chau, A. Kot, Low-light image enhancement with normalizing flow, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, Vol. 36, 2022, pp. 2604–2612. [37] A. Mittal, R. Soundararajan, A. C. Bovik, Making a "completely blind" image quality analyzer, IEEE Signal processing letters 20 (3) (2012) 209–212. [38] A. Mittal, A. K. Moorthy, A. C. Bovik, No-reference image quality as-sessment in the spatial domain, IEEE Transactions on image processing 21 (12) (2012) 4695–4708. [39] N. Venkatanath, D. Praneeth, S. C. Sumohana, S. M. Swarup, et al., Blind image quality evaluation using perception based features, in: 2015 twenty first national conference on communications (NCC), IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6. 41