Title: DGNNFlow: A Streaming Dataflow Architecture for Real-Time Edge-based Dynamic GNN Inference in HL-LHC Trigger Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20364v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:07:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
# DGNNFlow: A Streaming Dataflow Architecture for Real-Time Edge-based Dynamic GNN Inference in HL-LHC Trigger Systems 

Davendra Maharaj ∗, Tu Pham ∗, Peter Meiring †, Kyungmin Park †, Sena Durgut †, Cong Hao ∗, Matteo Cremonesi †∗Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA 

†Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 

Abstract —Dynamic GNN inference has exhibited effectiveness in High Energy Physics (HEP) experiments at High Luminosity Large Hadron Collider (HL-LHC) due to strong capability to model complex particle interactions in collision events. Future HEP experiments will involve detectors that produce 10x more collision data to help unlocking physics discoveries. Due to limitations in offline compute capacity and storage, revamped trigger systems require FPGAs to run ultra-low-latency Machine Learning models for online filtering of useful events with low power consumption. State-of-the-art GNN accelerators relied on static graph structures, but this assumption breaks down in real-time HL-LHC trigger systems and edge-based dynamic GNN models where edge embeddings change in-place based on neighbor node embeddings at runtime. We propose DGNNFlow, a novel dataflow architecture for real-time edge-based dynamic GNN inference applications, especially HL-LHC trigger systems, with three key contributions. First, we introduce hardware support for dynamic computation of edge embeddings. Second, we resolve data dependencies in edge-based dynamic GNN dataflow, where edge embedding is formulated using its source and target nodes. Third, we perform input dynamic graph construction auxiliary setup for complete support of models without pre-defined edge embeddings. We deployed DGNNFlow using AMD Alveo U50 FPGA to evaluate end-to-end latency on-board at 200 MHz clock frequency. DGNNFlow achieved 1.6 × -6.3 × speedup and 0.22 × power consumption compared to GPU (NVIDIA RTX A6000) with batch sizes from 1 to 4, 3.2 × - 5.1 ×

speedup and 0.25 × power consumption compared to CPU (Intel Xeon Gold 6226R). Our complete implementation is publicly available on GitHub 1.

I. I NTRODUCTION 

A. GNN, Edge-based Dynamic GNN, and Acceleration 

Graph Neural Network (GNN) is important class of neural network models for non-Euclidean graph data structures. They have been utilized in various applications, such as recommen-dation systems, physics simulation, and social network analy-sis. GNNs iteratively update node embeddings by aggregating information from corresponding neighbors to capture both local and global graph structures [1] [2]. Edge-based Dynamic GNNs such as EdgeConv [3] also update edge embeddings over time based on corresponding neighbor node embeddings to capture the relationships among nodes in graphs. GNN inference poses unique computational challenges, such as irregular memory access patterns and data-dependent 

> 1

https://github.com/submit-the-paper-1/DGNNFlow 

execution paths in aggregation, so specialized GNN accel-erators have emerged to address these challenges by ex-ploiting fine-grained parallelism, low-latency datapaths, and customization tailored to GNN workloads. 

B. HEP experiments and Hardware Accelerator Demand 

Next-generation High Energy Physics (HEP) experiments designed for HL-LHC [4] will generate collision data with rates in order of petabytes per second, far beyond capacity of data storage systems. To select potentially useful events in real-time, Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment employs two-level trigger system, which is completely re-designed for the start of HL-LHC data-taking in 2030. Hardware-based Level-1 Trigger (L1T) [5] will process limited-granularity detector data to make accept-reject decision, reducing event rate from 40 MHz to 750 kHz. L1T requires time-efficient, low-power processing and high-quality trigger quantities for sophisticated trigger decisions. Given L1T’s critical role of L1T in controlling event rates and GNN’s importance for com-plex pattern recognition in particle physics, there is a pressing need for the hardware accelerators supporting dynamic edge embedding inference and flexible message passing. 

C. Related Work and Limitations 

Recent GNN hardware accelerators have attempted to over-come inefficiencies of conventional CPUs and GPUs in graph-based computations. However, many existing designs primarily focus on static graphs and regular message-passing model, lim-iting their applicability to execute edge-based dynamic GNNs. HyGCN [6] uses hybrid aggregation to group nodes with same degrees, restricts irregular memory accesses, and primar-ily targets static graphs with fixed, pre-defined connectivity. AWB-GCN [7] adapts processing units based on node degrees for workload rebalancing and better resource utilization, but also assumes static graphs and fixed adjacency matrices. GraphACT [8] dynamically adjusts processing resources in accordance with workloads primarily for static graphs. DGNN-Booster [9] needs to transfer sequences of discrete static graph snapshots from host to FPGA over time for discrete-time dynamic GNN and does not natively support in-place updates of dynamic graphs’ edge embeddings on FPGA. FlowGNN [10] provides reconfigurable dataflow framework for wide 

> arXiv:2603.20364v1 [cs.DC] 20 Mar 2026

range of GNN models, but assumes statically provided edge features and fixed graph connectivity before inference. 

D. Our Contributions 

To address above demand and limitations, we propose our following contributions:  

> •

Develop FPGA-based streaming dataflow architecture that extends FlowGNN to support real-time edge-based dynamic GNN inference applications, including but not limited to HL-LHC trigger system.  

> •

Introduce hardware enhancement to compute edge em-beddings dynamically on FPGA, eliminating the need to transfer sequences of static graph snapshots from host to FPGA over time.  

> •

Resolve data dependencies in edge-based dynamic GNN dataflow without the need for irregular memory access.  

> •

Provide input dynamic graph construction auxiliary setup for graphs without pre-defined edge embeddings.  

> •

Prototype DGNNFlow on an AMD Alveo U50 FPGA and evaluate on-board end-to-end performance with dataset generated using the DELPHES framework [11]. II. D YNAMIC GNN A LGORITHM FOR HL-LHC T RIGGER SYSTEMS 

1) L1DeepMETv2 Model Architecture: We trained a novel EdgeConv-based Dynamic GNN for next-generation CMS L1T system to perform regression of total missing transverse energy (MET) sum (an important quantity that estimates momentum scale and imbalance of particle interactions in col-lision events but suffers from accumulating effects of detector noise, acceptance gaps, etc). Our new GNN approach, referred to as L1DeepMETv2 model, utilized graph approach (with nodes as particles and edges as their relationships), exploited interdependencies between particles reconstructed by L1T, and as shown in Fig. 2, it provided pivotal improvement in MET resolution with respect to traditional PUPPI algorithm (which computed fixed, local weights per particle based on neighbors, not optimized over graphs as clarified in [5]). The model evaluation consists of three stages, as illustrated in Fig. 1. First stage consists of normalizing and embedding per-particle input features. Continuous and categorical features are concatenated, followed by MLP and batch normalization to provide initial node embeddings. Second (main) stage  

> Fig. 1. The L1DeepMETv2 model architecture
> Fig. 2. MET resolutions with Dynamic GNN vs. traditional PUPPI algorithm (bin center = bin of MET values where corresponding resolution is computed, lower resolution = higher similarity between true and reconstructed values)

passes these embeddings through two message-passing GNN layers. Each layer includes an EdgeConv [3] that computes messages from particle pairs’ embeddings and aggregates neighbor information, a batch normalization, and a residual connection for stable performance optimization. Final layer includes MLP that projects final node embeddings to per-particle weight for regression of reconstructed MET sum. 

2) Dynamic Graph Construction: The stochastic nature of collision events implies that per-event graphs are dynamically constructed with edges created between nodes u and v if particles are within spatial proximity: 

∆R2(u, v ) = ( ηu − ηv )2 + ( ϕu − ϕv )2 < δ 2 (1) where η and ϕ are pseudorapidity and azimuthal angle in CMS coordinate system and δ is tunable distance threshold. 

3) EdgeConv Operator: EdgeConv [3], as shown in Fig. 3, is the core component of L1DeepMETv2 model architecture. It computes the messages between connected nodes based on the embeddings of both source node u and neighbor target node v as: 

muv = euv = ϕ(xu, x v − xu) (2) where ϕ is learnable function, particularly lightweight MLP. (xv − xu) enables encoding local relationships between neigh-bor nodes to represent correlations among particles. This requires graph’s dynamic in-place updates of edge embeddings with availability of both source and target node embeddings. III. H ARDWARE ARCHITECTURE 

A. Baseline Architecture - FlowGNN 

FlowGNN [10] is a modular, dataflow architecture to ac-celerate various message-passing GNNs on FPGA. It utilizes 

Pedge number of Message Passing (MP) Units that compute edge embeddings in parallel, Pnode number of Node Trans-formation (NT) Units that apply transformations for node Fig. 3. The EdgeConv operation, adapted from [3]. 

embeddings in parallel, and an adapter that connects to MP Units and NT Units via streaming FIFOs (First-In First-Out) and multicasts data to the correct processing units. The architecture also employs optimizations in memory usage. It uses double data buffers that switch roles across the GNN layers: if buffer 1 is read and buffer 2 is updated in particular layer, then buffer 2 is read and buffer 1 is updated in subsequent layer, and vice versa. The architecture also supports storing graph data in the compressed sparse row (CSR) format, allowing for efficient storage of sparse and irregular graphs. However, FlowGNN focuses on inference across static graph topologies, where edge lists and features are fixed, and lacks support for runtime edge embedding computation. 

B. Proposed Architecture - DGNNFlow 

We propose a novel streaming dataflow architecture, DGNNFlow, which extends FlowGNN [10] framework to enable real-time edge-based dynamic GNN inference applications (edge embeddings dynamically change based on neighbor node embeddings). DGNNFlow resolves FlowGNN’s limitation in inference with only static graph topologies and lack of support for runtime edge embedding computation. 

1) Overall dataflow execution: Our proposed architecture is illustrated in Fig. 4. Dataflow for each GNN layer starts from Input Node Embedding (NE) buffer, which is partitioned into Pedge banks and can be read by Pedge 

enhanced MP Units in parallel to retrieve their assigned source node embeddings xu. Node Embedding Broadcast stores copy of node embeddings from Input NE buffer in intermediate NE buffer and broadcasts the node embeddings over streaming FIFOs to all MP Units. Each MP Unit then filters target node embeddings xu with matching edges (u, v ),computes and sends edge embeddings through MP-to-NT adapter over streaming FIFOs to the corresponding NT Units. Each NT Unit uses edge embeddings received and copy of Input NE buffer to compute the resulting node embeddings of the current GNN layer. Pnode MP Units simultaneously write the resulting node embeddings to Pnode 

banks among total Pedge banks of Output NE buffer at a time. After write completion for entire Output NE buffer, Input and Output NE buffers are swapped for the subsequent GNN layer. The next three sections explain functionalities we introduce in DGNNFlow as extension of FlowGNN: Enhanced MP Finalize GNN Compute Load Weights Host FPGA Load Graph Load Node Embeddings Dynamic graph construction Node Features Bank 0 Bank 1 Bank 2  

> Bank 3
> MP Unit 2 MP Unit 1 MP Unit 0 NT Unit 0 NT Unit 1 MP
> to
> NT Adapter Intermediate NE Buffer MP Unit 3 Broadcast
> Bank 0
> Bank 1
> Bank 2
> Bank 3
> alternate by layer
> In NE Buffer Out NE Buffer
> Fig. 4. DGNNFlow for Real-time Edge-based Dynamic GNN Inference

Units, Node Embedding Broadcast, and input dynamic graph construction auxiliary setup. These functionalities enable the complete support of real-time edge-based dynamic GNN inference with on-the-fly edge embedding computations directly on FPGA. 

2) Enhanced MP Units with Runtime Edge Embedding Computation: Unlike conventional GNNs that depend on static, pre-computed edge embeddings, edge-based dynamic GNNs like EdgeConv [3] infer edge embeddings dynamically based on embeddings of both source and target nodes. FlowGNN [10] computes messages for neighbors based on only source node embeddings. Its MP Unit can locally access its assigned source node embedding, but has no local memory access to target node embeddings . Without this access, message computation would require additional communication overhead or memory duplication, thus introducing a signif-icant challenge for dynamic edge embedding computation. We propose Enhanced MP Units to dynamically compute edge embeddings on FPGA, with each unit independently processing its corresponding new edges. Enhanced MP Unit’s overall operation is illustrated in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Enhanced MP Unit  

> 1:

Receive the target embeddings xv from the Node Embed-ding Broadcast.  

> 2:

for each target embedding xv received do  

> 3:

if target node v matches assigned edge (u, v ) then  

> 4:

Retrieve the source embedding xu corresponding to the source node u. 

> 5:

Compute the difference vector △x = xv − xu. 

> 6:

Concatenate (xu, △x) to form the edge feature input.  

> 7:

Pass concatenated feature through learnable message function ϕ to produce the edge message muv . 

> 8:

Stream the edge message muv to aggregation adapter for further processing.  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

end for 3) Node Embedding Broadcast: To resolve data depen-dencies in edge-based dynamic GNN dataflow, we introduce Node Embedding Broadcast streaming module, where node embeddings are replicated once and broadcast to all MP Units in parallel. Each MP Unit listens to broadcast and selectively captures only embeddings associated with the assigned source nodes. This broadcasting approach fits naturally into streaming hardware model since it eliminates the need for irregular memory access to embedding matrix for target embeddings. Node Embedding Broadcast’s flow is shown in Algorithm 2. 

Algorithm 2 Node Embedding Broadcast Flow  

> 1:

Receive the complete node embedding matrix {xv } from Intermediate Node Embedding Buffer  

> 2:

for each target embedding xv do  

> 3:

Broadcast xv to all MP Units.  

> 4:

for each MP Unit do  

> 5:

if degree of v̸ = 0 in this MP Unit then  

> 6:

Capture and buffer node embedding xv for the later message computation.  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

end for 

To fully reinforce our approach, we also consider possible alternative designs with comparison of these designs’ func-tionalities and trade-offs:  

> •

Full Replication: Each MP Unit locally stores the entire node embedding matrix. This requires multiple duplica-tions of node embedding matrix, high memory usage, poor scalability for large graphs.  

> •

Multicast Bus: A specialized bus selectively pushes des-tination node embeddings to MP Units. This causes com-plex control, routing congestion, scalability bottleneck.  

> •

Node Embedding Broadcast (our approach): All node embeddings are broadcast and selectively captured by MP Units. This only requires single duplication of node embedding buffer to stream embeddings. Node Embedding Broadcast supports three crucial features. First, as explained above, the broadcast stream can be filtered in each MP Unit based on its assigned target nodes, avoiding redundant storage of entire node embedding matrix per MP Unit or complex selection of node embeddings to send to each MP Unit. Second, all node embeddings can be transmitted across processing units in deterministic manner. Third, the design naturally accommodates graphs with varying degrees of sparsity and maintains efficiency with growth in graph size. 

4) Input Dynamic Graph Construction Auxiliary Setup: We provide lightweight host-side auxiliary setup of input dynamic graph construction. For each pair of nodes (u, v ), undirected edge is generated if their distance complies with Equation 1. The resulting list of edges and node feature matrix are packed into memory buffers for transfer to FPGA for the above edge-based dynamic GNN inference procedure. IV. E XPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION 

A. Implementation and Model Configurations 

We implemented DGNNFlow for real-time edge-based dy-namic GNN inference using High-Level Synthesis with Vitis and Vivado. We cross-checked our implementation with Py-Torch implementation of L1DeepMETv2 to verify correct end-to-end execution. We deployed DGNNFlow on AMD Alveo U50 FPGA board for end-to-end performance evaluation with 200 MHz clock frequency. The L1DeepMETv2 model sepa-rates node features into 6 continuous and 2 categorical sub-features, and produces node embeddings with a dimension of 32. These embeddings are input to the EdgeConv layers to produce edge embedding messages, also of size 32. Each message generated by an EdgeConv layer undergoes batch nor-malization before entering the next EdgeConv layer. Resource utilization of DGNNFlow is reported by Vitis Analyzer and recorded in Table I. 

B. Dataset and Baselines 

We used DELPHES framework [11] to simulate HL-LHC proton-proton collision events, generating test dataset of 16K graphs as direct inputs of L1DeepMETv2. For baselines, we measured performance on CPU (Intel Xeon Gold 6226R) and GPU (NVIDIA RTX A6000) under two software (SW) vari-ants: Baseline SW version as PyTorch model and Optimized SW version, which utilizes torch.compile [12] with Just-In-Time compilation of PyTorch code for kernel optimization. To fairly target real-time per-graph inference, we used batch size of 1. However, we also evaluated GPU micro-batching with sizes 1 to 16 to understand amortized latency per graph against DGNNFlow. 

C. End-to-end Evaluation 

We evaluated end-to-end (E2E) latency for DGNNFlow, CPU, and GPU. E2E latency consists of data transfer time between host and device (for DGNNFlow, GPU) and edge-based dynamic GNN inference runtime. Input dynamic graph construction auxiliary setup time is not included in E2E                  

> TABLE I RESOURCE AVAILABILITY AND USAGE ON AMD A LVEO U50 FPGA Resource LUT Register BRAM DSP
> Available 872K 1,743K 1,344 5,952 Usage 235,017 228,548 488 601
> Fig. 5. Average E2E Latency per graph by Batch size

Fig. 6. E2E Latency per graph by Numbers of Nodes and Edges TABLE II AVERAGE POWER CONSUMPTION COMPARISON 

AMONG DGNNF LOW (ON FPGA), GPU, AND CPU 

FPGA GPU CPU FPGA vs. GPU FPGA vs. CPU 

5.89W 26.25W 23.25W 0.22 × 0.25 ×

latency in all of DGNNFlow, CPU, GPU to allow for mea-surement of system’s actual execution time. Fig. 5 depicts average end-to-end latency across all batch sizes for GPU; CPU and DGNNFlow were evaluated at batch size 1. DGN-NFlow achieves 0.283 ms per graph. DGNNFlow is 5.1 × and 3.2 × faster than CPU Baseline SW and CPU Optimized SW versions respectively. DGNNFlow outperforms GPU Baseline SW version up to batch size 4 by 1.6 × - 6.3 × and outper-forms GPU Optimized SW version by 2.0 × - 4.1 × until it breaks even at batch size 4. Higher batch size reduces GPU’s amortized latency, so GPU can deliver higher throughput when batching. However, for real-time data streaming requirement in HL-LHC trigger systems, a batch size of 1 remains the main comparison point. Fig. 6 shows that CPU latency increases steadily and exhibits widening gap between median and 99th percentile as graph size grows. GPU latency is high with small graph size but stays highly consistent with graph size growth due to better utilization of GPU’s high throughput. Despite latency increase with growth in graph size, DGNNFlow still achieves remarkably shorter latency than both GPU and CPU. We also evaluated the average power consumption for DGNNFlow, CPU, and GPU (at batch size 1) as shown in Table II. DGNNFlow showed significantly lower average power consumption compared to both CPU and GPU. Therefore, DGNNFlow’s main strength is low-latency, low-power inference while GPU’s advantage remains throughput with batching. DGNNFlow provides the first pivotal step for acceleration with novel real-time edge-based dynamic GNN inference approach in HL-LHC trigger systems. V. C ONCLUSION 

This paper presented DGNNFlow, a streaming dataflow architecture for real-time edge-based dynamic GNN inference applications, especially HL-LHC trigger systems, with three extra functionalities as extension of FlowGNN [10], including (i) Enhanced MP Units, (ii) Node Embedding Broadcast, (iii) dynamic graph construction auxiliary setup. DGNNFlow exhibited 1.6 × - 6.3 × speedup and 0.22 × power consumption compared to NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU with batch sizes 1 to 4, 3.2 × - 5.1 × speedup and 0.25 × power consumption compared to Intel Xeon Gold 6226R CPU. These results indicate that DGNNFlow provides the first pivotal step towards developing edge-based dynamic GNN inference in HL-LHC trigger systems. REFERENCES [1] K. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Zhao, P. Ding, and W. Zhao, “Local structure-aware graph contrastive representation learning,” Neural Networks , vol. 172, p. 106083, 2024. [2] J. Li et al. , “Graph contrastive representation learning with input-aware and cluster-aware regularization,” in Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: Research Track: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2023, Turin, Italy, September 18–22, 2023, Proceedings, Part II .Springer-Verlag, 2023, p. 666–682. [3] Y. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Liu, S. E. Sarma, M. M. Bronstein, and J. M. Solomon, “Dynamic Graph CNN for Learning on Point Clouds,” ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 38, pp. 1–12, October 2019. [4] O. Aberle et al. , “High-Luminosity Large Hadron Collider (HL-LHC): Technical design report,” December 2020. [Online]. Available: https://cds.cern.ch/record/2749422 [5] CMS Collaboration, “The Phase-2 Upgrade of the CMS Level-1 Trigger,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://cds.cern.ch/record/2714892 [6] M. Yan et al. , “HyGCN: A GCN Accelerator with Hybrid Architecture,” in 2020 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) . IEEE Computer Society, February 2020, pp. 15– 29. [7] T. Geng et al. , “AWB-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Ac-celerator with Runtime Workload Rebalancing,” in 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) ,October 2020, pp. 922–936. [8] H. Zeng and V. Prasanna, “GraphACT: Accelerating GCN Training on CPU-FPGA Heterogeneous Platforms,” in Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays . Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, p. 255–265. [9] H. Chen, , and C. Hao, “DGNN-Booster: A Generic FPGA Accelerator Framework For Dynamic Graph Neural Network Inference,” in 2023 IEEE 31st Annual International Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM) . IEEE Computer Society, May 2023, pp. 195–201. [10] R. Sarkar, S. Abi-Karam, Y. He, L. Sathidevi, and C. Hao, “FlowGNN: A Dataflow Architecture for Real-Time Workload-Agnostic Graph Neural Network Inference,” in 2023 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) . IEEE Computer Society, March 2023, pp. 1099–1112. [11] J. de Favereau et al. , “DELPHES 3, A modular framework for fast simulation of a generic collider experiment,” JHEP , vol. 02, p. 057, 2014. [12] J. Ansel, E. Yang, H. He, N. Gimelshein, A. Jain, M. Voznesensky, B. Bao, P. Bell, D. Berard, E. Burovski, G. Chauhan, A. Chourdia, W. Constable, A. Desmaison, Z. DeVito, E. Ellison, W. Feng, J. Gong, M. Gschwind, B. Hirsh, S. Huang, K. Kalambarkar, L. Kirsch, M. Lazos, M. Lezcano, Y. Liang, J. Liang, Y. Lu, C. K. Luk, B. Maher, Y. Pan, C. Puhrsch, M. Reso, M. Saroufim, M. Y. Siraichi, H. Suk, S. Zhang, M. Suo, P. Tillet, X. Zhao, E. Wang, K. Zhou, R. Zou, X. Wang, A. Mathews, W. Wen, G. Chanan, P. Wu, and S. Chintala, “Pytorch 2: Faster machine learning through dynamic python bytecode transformation and graph compilation,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 , ser. ASPLOS ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 929–947. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3620665.3640366