Title: The Program Hypergraph: Multi-Way Relational Structure for Geometric Algebra, Spatial Compute, and Physics-Aware Compilation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.17627v1

Published Time: Thu, 19 Mar 2026 01:12:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# The Program Hypergraph: Multi-Way Relational Structure for Geometric Algebra, Spatial Compute, and Physics-Aware Compilation 

Houston Haynes SpeakEZ Technologies, Asheville, NC 

hhaynes2@alumni.unca.edu 

March 2026 

Abstract 

The Program Semantic Graph (PSG) introduced in prior work on Dimensional Type Systems and Deterministic Memory Management encodes compilation-relevant properties as binary edge relations between computation nodes. This representation is adequate for scalar and tensor computations, but becomes structurally insufficient for two classes of problems that are increasingly central to heterogeneous compute. The first, recognized in the context of targeting spatial dataflow accelerators, is that tile co-location and routing constraints in NPU architectures are inherently multi-way: they govern sets of operations jointly and cannot be correctly decomposed into independent pairwise constraints. The second, larger in scope and consequence, is that geometric algebra computation (specifically, the graded multi-way products that underlie Clifford algebra neural networks, physics simulation, and mesh-based finite element analysis) cannot be represented faithfully as sequences of binary operations without loss of algebraic identity and accumulation of avoidable numerical error. This paper introduces the Program Hypergraph (PHG) as a principled generalization of the PSG that promotes binary edges to hyperedges of arbitrary arity. We demonstrate that grade in Clifford algebra is a natural dimension axis within the existing DTS abelian group framework, that the geometric product sparsity derivable from grade inference eliminates the primary performance objection to Clifford algebra neural networks without manual specialization, and that the k-simplex structure of mesh topology is a direct instance of the hyperedge formalism applied to geometric computation. We assess the existing geometric algebra library ecosystem, identifying the consistent type-theoretic gap that no current system addresses, and show that the PHG closes it within the Fidelity compilation framework. The practical consequence is a compilation framework where geometric correctness, memory placement, numerical precision selection, and hardware partitioning are jointly derivable from a single graph structure that the language server exposes as interactive design-time feedback. 

# 1. Introduction 

1.1 The Binary Edge Boundary 

The Program Semantic Graph introduced in [ 9 ] encodes computation as a directed graph where nodes represent values and computations, edges represent data dependencies, and edge annotations carry dimensional, coeffect, and lifetime information. This structure is sufficient for the class of computations that the existing Clef/Fidelity framework targets: scalar arithmetic, tensor operations, memory-managed data structures, and multi-target lowering through MLIR. 1

> arXiv:2603.17627v1 [cs.PL] 18 Mar 2026

Two classes of problems expose a structural limitation of the binary edge model. The first was recognized in the context of heterogeneous hardware mapping; the second, introduced through engagement with the geometric algebra research community, is broader in scope and carries implications that extend well beyond the compilation problem that initially motivated it. The first class is spatial dataflow architecture mapping. The AMD XDNA 2 NPU arranges AI Engine tiles in a two-dimensional grid with explicit programmer-managed data movement via DMA and configurable interconnect [ 18 ]. Mapping a subgraph of computations to this architecture requires co-locating sets of operations on tiles, configuring routes between tile groups, and partitioning columns into spatial workload contexts. A tile placement constraint is not a constraint between two nodes; it is a constraint over the set of nodes that must reside on the same tile or within the same column. The natural formalism is a hyperedge connecting all members of the co-location set. A clique of binary edges is semantically incorrect: it asserts that each pair must be co-located independently, which does not entail that all members are co-located together. The second class is geometric algebra computation, and it is by far the richer domain. The geometric product of two multivectors is bilinear; as a binary relation it appears to fit the existing graph model. The issue is not the product in isolation but the compound operations built from products. The meet of two subspaces, the join of three points to form a plane, the intersection of four planes at a point: these are operations with three or more semantically indivisible inputs. Decomposing a three-way join into a sequence of binary joins introduces intermediate nodes that have no geometric meaning, cannot be assigned well-typed grade annotations, and accumulate floating-point error at each intermediate step. The algebraic identity that the join of three points is a plane is a single fact about a three-way relation; encoding it as two sequential binary relations loses that identity. The significance of this second class extends considerably beyond the immediate compilation problem. Geometric algebra, and Clifford algebra more generally, provides a coordinate-free framework for physics simulation, robotics, fluid dynamics, relativistic electrodynamics, and mesh-based finite element analysis. The emerging field of geometric algebra neural networks exploits this structure for equivariant learning, with demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on physical simulation benchmarks [ 19 , 24 ]. The PHG provides the compilation infrastructure for this domain, opening a path from the geometric algebra research community’s theoretical advances to the heterogeneous hardware targets that define the practical frontier of scientific computing. Both problems point to the same structural requirement: a generalization of the binary edge to a relation of arbitrary arity. 

1.2 Contributions 

This paper makes four claims, presented in the order in which the motivating problems were encountered and recognized. 1. The PHG is a minimal, well-motivated generalization of the PSG. The transition from binary edges to hyperedges preserves all existing PSG properties while enabling 2the representation of multi-way constraints that binary edges cannot express without information loss. 2. Spatial dataflow architectures require hyperedge co-location constraints. The mapping of computation subgraphs to spatial hardware is a hypergraph partitioning problem. The PHG’s hyperedge structure provides the natural representation for these constraints, enabling the Fidelity framework to extend its existing multi-target lowering infrastructure to spatial accelerators. 3. Grade in Clifford algebra is a DTS dimension axis, and grade inference derives geometric product sparsity. The graded structure of Clifford algebra forms a finitely generated abelian group under the outer product. The existing DTS inference machinery, extended with a grade dimension, can derive the non-zero entries of the geometric product Cayley table from type signatures alone, eliminating the primary computational objection to geometric algebra neural networks without manual specialization. 4. Physics-aware computation exposes multi-way constraints that compose nat-urally in the PHG. Physics-informed neural networks, forward-mode automatic differ-entiation over geometric computations, and high-performance computing kernels over mesh topologies all expose constraints that are inherently multi-way. The PHG provides a unified representation for their joint resolution across heterogeneous hardware targets. 

1.3 Scope and Context 

The system described here is an extension of the Clef programming language and the Fidelity compilation framework introduced in [ 9 ]. All formal properties of the DTS and DMM systems are assumed without restatement. The geometric algebra analysis in Section 3 assumes familiarity with Clifford algebras at the level of an introductory graduate course; the treatment of specific algebras (PGA, CGA) is self-contained where it matters for the compilation argument. The Fidelity compilation pipeline compiles Clef source through a canonical MLIR middle-end (Composer) that fans out to multiple backend pathways: LLVM for CPU, GPU, MCU, and WebAssembly targets; CIRCT for FPGA synthesis; and MLIR-AIE for AI Engine architectures. Figure 1 shows how the PHG sits within this pipeline and how the three primary application domains connect through it. 

1.4 Intellectual Continuity: The DCont/Inet Headwaters 

The PHG traces its structural motivation to the DCont/Inet duality established in prior Fidelity framework work [ 7 ]. That work identifies two fundamental patterns into which Clef computation expressions decompose during compilation: the DCont (delimited continuation) path for sequential effectful computations, and the Inet (interaction net) path for pure parallel computations where operations are structurally independent and can reduce simultaneously. The DCont/Inet duality is grounded in the algebraic structure of each class. Delimited continuations form a monad: they compose sequentially, with left identity and associativity laws that allow the compiler to eliminate unnecessary continuation frames and fuse adjacent 3continuations. Interaction nets form a symmetric monoidal category: they compose in parallel, with associativity and braiding laws that allow the compiler to regroup and reorder operations freely. The DCont dialect for MLIR [ 10 ] and the Inet dialect [ 3] provide the intermediate representation infrastructure for both paths within the Fidelity pipeline. Actors in the Olivier model are structurally DCont with arena-scoped RAII: each actor’s message handler is a continuation captured at a suspension point, and the arena is the coeffect resource that the computation requires from its context. The Prospero orchestration layer manages arena lifetimes across the actor hierarchy, making the actor model a zero-runtime realization of the DCont pattern at scale. The PHG extends the Inet path in a specific and necessary direction. An interaction net rule fires on a binary active pair: two agent nodes connected by their principal ports. When the independent reductions are not over scalars but over graded multivector components, the independence structure is determined by the grade algebra, and the unit of reduction is a k-tuple of nodes whose joint grade constrains the output. The geometric product of a grade-p and a grade-q element is binary, but produces contributions to multiple output grades simultaneously; the outer product of k grade-1 elements is k-ary, and its result is a property of all k inputs jointly. The PHG hyperedge is therefore the Inet active pair generalized to arity k, where k is determined by the algebraic structure of the domain. 

# 2. The Program Hypergraph: Formal Structure 

2.1 From Binary Edges to Hyperedges 

A directed graph G = ( V, E ) consists of a vertex set V and an edge set E where each edge e

is a pair ( u, v ) of vertices. The PSG is a directed graph with annotated vertices and edges: each vertex carries type, dimension, and coeffect annotations; each edge carries a reachability bitvector and a dependency kind annotation. A directed hypergraph H = ( V, F ) generalizes this by replacing the edge set E with a hyperedge set F , where each hyperedge f is an ordered tuple ( S, t ) consisting of a source set 

S ⊆ V and a target t ∈ V . A binary edge is the special case where |S| = 1. 

Definition 2.1 (Program Hypergraph) . A Program Hypergraph is a tuple PHG = ( V, F, α, β )where: 

• V is a set of computation nodes, each carrying a type annotation τ (v), a dimension annotation δ(v) ∈ Zn, a coeffect annotation κ(v), and a three-state activation flag 

σ(v) ∈ { Live , Latent , Fresh }.

• F is a set of directed hyperedges, each of the form f = ( Sf , t f , λ f ) where Sf ⊆ V is the source set, tf ∈ V is the target node, and λf is the hyperedge annotation. 

• α : V → Ann V is the vertex annotation function assigning dimensional, coeffect, and lifetime properties to each node. 

• β : F → Ann F is the hyperedge annotation function assigning relational semantics to each hyperedge. The binary edge ( u, v ) in the PSG is recovered as the special case f = ( {u}, v, λ ). The 4Clef source 

> type annotations

Composer frontend 

> parse + typecheck

Program Se-mantic Graph 

> DTS annotations, DMM coeffects

Program Hy-pergraph  

> binary + k-ary hyperedges

PHG saturation 

> SMT-LIB2 via Z3

MLIR emission 

> Alex zipper traversal

LLVM 

> CPU/GPU/MCU

CIRCT 

> FPGA synthesis

MLIR-AIE 

> XDNA NPU

Geometric algebra grade hy-peredges 

Spatial dataflow co-location 

Physics simulation mesh topology 

Figure 1: The PHG within the Fidelity/Composer compilation pipeline. Three primary application domains feed into the PHG through grade, co-location, and topology hyperedges. The pipeline fans out to LLVM, CIRCT, and MLIR-AIE backends from a shared MLIR middle-end. hyperedge generalization is therefore backward-compatible: every valid PSG is a valid PHG with all hyperedges having |Sf | = 1. 

2.2 Hyperedge Annotation Categories 

The hyperedge annotation λf carries the following categories of information, extending the binary edge annotation vocabulary of the PSG. 

Arity and grade. For geometric algebra operations, λf records the grades of all source nodes and the derived grade of the target. For a hyperedge representing the outer product of grade-p and grade-q elements, λf encodes the grade constraint δ(tf ) = δ(s1) + δ(s2) . For a k-simplex join of k+ 1 vertices, λf encodes the k-simplex type of the target, which follows from the grades of all k+1 source nodes jointly. 

Co-location constraint. For spatial dataflow architectures, λf may encode a co-location 5requirement: all nodes in Sf must be mapped to the same tile, column, or memory region in the target architecture. This is a constraint over the source set that cannot be expressed as independent pairwise constraints without loss of semantics. 

Relational kind. The kind field generalizes the binary edge’s dependency kind to multi-way relations: geometric product, join, meet, co-location, transfer, synchronization barrier, or user-defined relational operator. 

Reachability bitvector. A hyperedge carries a bitvector with one bit per configured target, indicating on which targets the hyperedge is active. 

2.3 Saturation Semantics for Hyperedges 

The PSG’s saturation semantics extend to hyperedges with one modification: the inference rule for a hyperedge fires only when all source nodes in Sf are elaborated, not just one. This is the correct generalization: the grade of a k-simplex is determined jointly by all k+1vertex grades; a partial observation of k of them is insufficient. Formally, the saturation rule for f = ( Sf , t f , λ f ) is: If all v ∈ Sf are Saturated, then tf may be elaborated using α(v) for all v ∈ Sf jointly. This is monotone over the activation lattice {Fresh < Elaborated < Saturated }, so the standard fixpoint argument for PSG saturation applies. PHG saturation terminates in 

O(|V | + |F |) iterations. 

2.4 The Binary Edge as Degenerate Hyperedge 

The transition from PSG to PHG is an embedding, not a replacement. Every PSG is a PHG where all hyperedges have |Sf | = 1. The existing DTS inference machinery, the DMM coeffect propagation, the three-state node model, and the language server protocol integration all apply without modification when restricted to binary hyperedges. The information accrual principle from [ 9] applies to hyperedges as it does to binary edges: 

Q(Ik) < Q (Ik+1 ) for all k

A multi-way geometric product constraint, once established as a hyperedge with full grade information for all sources, carries strictly more information to downstream optimization than the same constraint decomposed into a sequence of binary edges with intermediate nodes. 

# 3. Geometric Algebra as a PHG Domain 

3.1 A Primer on Clifford Algebras 

Clifford algebra, also called geometric algebra when emphasizing its geometric interpretation, is a mathematical framework that unifies several classical structures: vectors, complex numbers, quaternions, and the exterior algebra of differential forms. The unification is not 6merely notational; it reveals that these apparently separate tools are all instances of the same underlying structure, parameterized by the dimension and metric signature of the space they operate over. The construction begins with a real vector space V of dimension d and a quadratic form 

Q : V → R that assigns a squared magnitude to each vector. The familiar cases are Euclidean space ( Q(v) > 0 for all v̸ = 0, giving the signature Rd, 0,0), Minkowski spacetime ( Q is positive for spatial directions and negative for the time direction, giving R1,3,0), and projective space (Q is degenerate, with one null direction, giving Rn, 0,1). The Clifford algebra Cl (V, Q ) is generated by extending V with a product operation, the geometric product , that satisfies: 

v2 = Q(v) for all v ∈ V

From this single rule, all of the algebra’s structure follows. When Q(v) = 1 for all unit vectors (Euclidean signature), squaring a vector gives the scalar 1. When Q(v) = −1 for certain basis directions (pseudo-Euclidean signature), squaring gives the scalar −1, reproducing the imaginary unit and generalizing complex numbers to higher dimensions. When Q(v) = 0 for a null direction (degenerate signature), squaring gives 0, enabling the projective and homogeneous coordinate representations used in computer graphics. 

Multivectors and grade. The geometric product of two distinct basis vectors ei and ej

(where i̸ = j) produces a new object eiej that cannot be reduced to a scalar or a vector. This object is called a bivector , and it represents an oriented planar area element. The product of three distinct basis vectors produces a trivector (oriented volume element), and so on. The resulting objects are called multivectors , and each is characterized by its grade : the number of basis vector factors that compose it. Scalars have grade 0, vectors have grade 1, bivectors have grade 2, and so forth up to the pseudoscalar of grade d, which is the product of all d

basis vectors and represents the oriented volume of the full space. For a d-dimensional vector space, the Clifford algebra contains elements of every grade from 0 to d. The number of distinct basis elements at grade k is  dk

, giving a total algebra dimension of Pdk=0 

 dk

 = 2 d. A general multivector is a linear combination of basis elements at all grades. 

The three products. Three products of particular importance arise from the geometric product: The outer product (wedge product) a ∧ b extracts the purely grade-increasing part of the geometric product: if a has grade p and b has grade q, then a ∧ b has grade p + q, or is zero if p + q > d . The outer product encodes geometric incidence: two vectors are parallel if and only if their outer product is zero. The inner product a · b extracts the purely grade-decreasing part: a · b has grade |p − q|.The inner product encodes metric relationships: the inner product of two grade-1 vectors recovers the familiar dot product. The geometric product ab is the sum of the inner and outer products for grade-1 inputs, and generalizes both to higher grades. For a grade-p element and a grade-q element, the geometric product contributes to grades |p − q|, |p − q| + 2, . . . , p + q. The geometric product 7is invertible for non-null elements, making it the algebraically richest of the three products and the basis for representing geometric transformations. 

Geometric objects and transformations. In Plane-based Geometric Algebra (PGA, 

R3,0,1), the commonly used algebra for 3D Euclidean geometry, geometric objects have specific grade representations. Points are grade-3 elements (trivectors). Lines are grade-2 elements (bivectors). Planes are grade-1 elements (vectors). The pseudoscalar has grade 4. Euclidean transformations (rotations, translations, and their compositions) are represented as even-grade multivectors called rotors , and the action of a transformation on a geometric object is computed as the sandwich product : X 7 → RX ˜R, where ˜R denotes the reversal (conjugate) of R.In Conformal Geometric Algebra (CGA, R4,1), the algebra is extended to also represent spheres and circles as grade-1 and grade-2 elements respectively, and inversions and M¨ obius transformations become versor operations. 

Why this matters for compilation. The grade of a multivector is not merely a descriptive label; it is a structural invariant that determines which algebraic operations are applicable, which product entries are non-zero, and what geometric meaning the result carries. Acomputation that applies the wrong-grade product to an input, or that loses track of the grade of an intermediate result, produces either a zero (if the grade exceeds the algebra dimension) or a result in the wrong grade subspace (which corresponds to a geometrically meaningless value). These are the class of errors that the PHG’s grade-aware type system detects at design time .This distinction is worth making precise, because it differs from what most developers mean by “compile time.” In the Fidelity framework, the Composer compiler runs continuously as a language server through Lattice, and PSG elaboration (including grade inference, SMT-LIB2 proof discharge, and the full annotation saturation pipeline) executes as source is written, not when a build is explicitly invoked. A grade violation surfaces as a diagnostic in the development environment at the moment the offending expression is typed, before any build step occurs and before any execution is possible. Readers accustomed to Python, where the interpreter is effectively the compiler and errors are discovered at runtime, or to conventional compiled languages where “compile time” means a discrete build invocation, should interpret “design time” throughout this paper as meaning: while the engineer is writing code, as a continuous background service, with no execution required . This is the capability that makes the PHG’s structural guarantees practically useful rather than theoretically available. 

3.2 The Graded Structure of Clifford Algebras 

A Clifford algebra Cl (V, Q ) is generated by a vector space V with a quadratic form Q. The algebra is graded: each element decomposes into components of grade k, where grade k means membership in the span of all k-fold products of basis vectors. For a d-dimensional vector space, grades run from 0 (scalars) to d (pseudoscalars), and the total algebra dimension is 2d.The graded structure is an abelian group under the outer product. The outer product of a grade-p element and a grade-q element produces a grade-( p+q) element, or zero if 8p+q > d . This is exactly the additive structure of the DTS dimensional group Zn: grade is a non-negative integer exponent, the outer product maps to addition, and the dimension bound maps to the constraint that exponents cannot exceed the algebra dimension. 

Proposition 3.1 (Grade is a DTS Dimension Axis) . The grade of a Clifford algebra element satisfies the axioms of a DTS dimension: it is an element of a finitely generated abelian group ( Z, +), it is preserved under the outer product (addition), and its consistency is decidable in O(1) per operation. The DTS inference algorithm of Section 2.2 of [ 9] applies to grade inference without modification, with grade substituting for a physical dimension in the constraint system. 

Proof. The outer product grade rule δ(a ∧ b) = δ(a) +δ(b) is a dimensional addition constraint identical to multiplication of physical units. The constraint that p + q ≤ d is a bounded domain constraint identical to the SMT sort constraints used for memory dimensions. Both are decidable by integer comparison. □

3.3 Geometric Product Sparsity from Grade Inference 

The geometric product of two multivectors decomposes as the sum of the inner product (grade |p − q|) and the outer product (grade p + q) components. For a general multivector in d dimensions, the Cayley table of the geometric product is a 2 d × 2d matrix specifying how each basis element of the first operand interacts with each basis element of the second. The critical observation is that the majority of Cayley table entries are structurally zero, determined entirely by the grade structure of the operands. The Flash Clifford implemen-tation [ 23 ] quantifies this precisely: the naive dense Cayley table implementation is 85% sparse in 2D and 95% sparse in 3D. Formally, let f = ( {a, b }, c, λ gp ) be a geometric product hyperedge where δ(a) = p and 

δ(b) = q. The grade inference rule for the geometric product is: 

δ(c) ∈ {| p − q|, |p − q| + 2 , . . . , p + q}

with specific grades present or absent determined by the metric signature of the algebra. For the common cases (PGA, CGA, STA), the non-zero grade contributions are fully determined by the algebra specification and the operand grades. The practical consequence for MLIR emission: the code generation traversal observes the grade constraint on each geometric product hyperedge and selects the appropriate sparse implementation. For a grade-1 times grade-2 product in 3D PGA, the emitted MLIR computes 8 multiplications and 4 additions (the non-zero entries) rather than 96 multiplications and 80 additions (the dense Cayley table). This is a compile-time selection driven by grade annotations in the PHG, performed before any MLIR optimization pass runs. 

3.4 The k-Simplex as a Native PHG Hyperedge 

De Keninck, Roelfs, Dorst, and Eelbode [ 4 ] demonstrate that in Plane-based Geometric Algebra, k-simplices and k-complexes can be written compactly as joins of vertices. A

k-simplex is the outer product of k+ 1 grade-1 elements (points in the conformal or projective 9model). This is a ( k+ 1)-to-1 relation: a triangle is the join of three points, a tetrahedron the join of four. In the binary PSG, the triangle join must be decomposed into two sequential binary outer products: first join two points to get an edge (grade 2), then join the edge with the third point to get the triangle (grade 3). This introduces an intermediate node that has no independent geometric meaning in the context of the triangle construction. In the PHG, the triangle join is a single hyperedge f = ( {p1, p 2, p 3}, triangle , λ ∧) where 

δ(pi) = 1 for each i and δ(triangle) = 3. The grade constraint fires only when all three source nodes are available, and the geometric identity that the join of three points is a plane is encoded as a single algebraic fact in the hyperedge annotation. 

Proposition 3.2 (BSP Predicate Exactness from PHG Grade Inference) . Let p be a grade-1 node and π be a grade-3 node in a PGA PHG. The meet hyperedge f = ( {p, π }, result , λ ∨)has δ(result) = 0 (scalar) if and only if the point lies on the plane. This determination requires no numerical comparison against a threshold; it is an algebraic fact derivable from the grade structure. 

Proof. In R3,0,1, the regressive product of a grade-1 element and a grade-3 element yields grade 3 +1−4 = 0 (scalar) when the elements are incident, and grade 2 otherwise. The grade is an algebraic fact; it is not a floating-point magnitude. □

3.5 Assessment of the Existing Geometric Algebra Library Ecosystem 

The bivector.net library catalog [ 25 ] provides a representative survey of production geometric algebra implementations. Every library works around the absence of grade as a first-class type-level property through one of three mechanisms. 

Runtime specialization. Kingdon, the Python Clifford library, Ganja.js, and GAm-phetamine generate product code on first use, paying the symbolic analysis cost at runtime. GAmphetamine (De Keninck’s successor to Ganja.js) performs coefficient-level symbolic opti-mization with CSE and variable prefetching, generating lazy per-type-pair implementations. The time-to-first-product for R3 is approximately 2.9 ms in the default non-precompiled mode; this cost moves to compile time and vanishes from the runtime budget in the Fidelity framework. 

Manual compile-time specialization. Klein provides a hand-optimized SSE implemen-tation of 3D PGA with no runtime overhead, achieved by fixing the algebra ( R3,0,1), the dimension (4D), and the instruction set (x86 SSE), and manually working out every non-zero product entry. Klein is production-ready. Its limitation is architectural: adding a new algebra requires re-deriving and hand-coding every product, and the library provides no path to non-SSE targets. 

Template-driven compile-time specialization. Versor uses C++ template metapro-gramming to derive product implementations at compile time. The grade of each multivector type is encoded in the template parameter, and the compiler instantiates product implemen-tations specialized for each grade combination. The limitation relative to the PHG is that Versor’s grade information exists in the C++ type system but is not visible to a language server, not integrated with memory placement analysis, not used for representation selection 10 on heterogeneous targets, and not composable with physical dimensional constraints. 

Optimizer-based specialization. GAALOP converts symbolic geometric algebra expres-sions into optimized coefficient-level code for a large number of target languages, including C, C++, C#, CUDA, Rust, and Julia. GAALOP’s architecture is the closest existing system to what the PHG does for geometric algebra: it performs the sparsity analysis and emits specialized code per algebra and target. The critical difference is that GAALOP is a code generation tool, not a compilation pipeline component. Its output loses algebraic provenance; the grade constraints that drove GAALOP’s optimization are not preserved as annotations in the emitted code. The common gap across all libraries is that none provide grade as a first-class type system property that survives into a compiler’s semantic graph, participates in coeffect inference, influences memory placement and representation selection, and is exposed through a language server protocol. 

Rust and statically typed languages. Rust’s type system supports const generics, which in principle allow grade to be encoded as a type parameter, but the existing tooling does not build this out into a full grade-aware type system with inference, dimensional polymorphism, or language server integration. The Rust borrow checker provides strong lifetime guarantees but has no concept of geometric grade, no mechanism for dimensional constraint propagation, and no path to the multi-target representation selection described in [ 9 ]. The PHG framework extends this to geometric correctness at the grade level, with both properties jointly verifiable in the same semantic graph. 

# 4. Spatial Dataflow Architectures and Co-location Constraints 

4.1 The Tile Mapping Problem 

The AMD XDNA 2 NPU arranges AI Engine tiles in a two-dimensional grid. Each tile contains a VLIW processor, local data memory (typically 32 KB), and configurable stream-switch interconnect [ 18 ]. Computations are mapped to tiles; data is moved between tiles via DMA over a configurable interconnect fabric. The mapping problem has two coupled components: tile assignment and route configuration. The tile assignment problem exposes a constraint that is irreducibly multi-way. Consider a matrix multiplication partitioned into four tiles: tile A loads a column of the left matrix, tiles B and C perform partial dot products, and tile D reduces and stores the result. The constraint that tiles A, B, C, and D form a coherent pipeline is not decomposable into independent pairwise constraints. In the PHG, this pipeline constraint is a single hyperedge: 

f =  {A, B, C, D }, result , λ tile 



where λtile encodes the co-location requirement, the routing topology, and the synchronization barrier at D.11 4.2 Hyperedge Partitioning: CIRCT for FPGAs and MLIR-AIE for NPUs 

The co-location hyperedge formalism applies to both of the Fidelity framework’s spatial compilation paths, but the two paths are architecturally distinct. The CIRCT lowering path targets FPGA synthesis. An FPGA’s programmable fabric is a spatial resource: lookup tables, DSP slices, block RAMs, and routing fabric are distributed across a fixed die topology. A PHG co-location hyperedge encoding a group of operations that must share a DSP cascade, or that must fit within a single clock region to meet timing, is exactly the kind of multi-way placement constraint that VLSI hypergraph partitioning algorithms consume natively [ 11 ]. The Fidelity framework’s CIRCT lowering pass can invoke these algorithms using PHG co-location hyperedges as partition constraints. The output feeds into vendor synthesis tools (Vivado for Xilinx, Quartus for Intel) as placement directives. The MLIR-AIE lowering path targets the XDNA 2 NPU’s AI Engine tile array [ 1 ]. Unlike FPGA fabric, AI Engine tiles are a fixed architecture: VLIW processors arranged in a two-dimensional grid with explicit, programmer-managed DMA-based data movement. The co-location constraint here is tile assignment: which operations run on which tiles, which DMA channels transfer data between them, and which synchronization barriers govern the pipeline. The MLIR-AIE lowering pass consumes the hyperedge annotation and emits the corresponding tile kernel code, DMA buffer descriptors, and synchronization primitives in the AIE dialect, which the aiecc toolchain then compiles to the NPU binary. Both paths share the same PHG hyperedge vocabulary at the compiler’s middle-end. The difference is in what the co-location constraint resolves to at the target boundary: fabric placement directives for CIRCT, and tile kernel assignments with DMA routing for MLIR-AIE. 

4.3 GPU Warp-Level Parallelism and the Grade-Aligned Kernel 

GPU computation is organized into warps (groups of 32 threads executing in lockstep) and thread blocks (groups of warps sharing shared memory). The Flash Clifford im-plementation [ 23 ] exploits this by structuring the geometric product computation as a fused kernel where the multivector dimension axis aligns with the warp dimension: the (MV DIM , BATCH SIZE , NUM FEATURES ) memory layout allows the linear layer to be expressed as a batch matrix multiply with the MV DIM axis mapping directly to warp lanes. This layout optimization is a consequence of grade structure: the multivector’s 2 d components, organized by grade, form a natural partition that maps to the warp dimension when d is small (d = 2 gives 4 components, d = 3 gives 8, d = 4 gives 16). The PHG grade inference that determines this component count at compile time also determines whether the warp-aligned layout is applicable and what the optimal tiling strategy is for a given algebra dimension and batch size. The GPU lowering path from PHG-annotated Clifford dialect operations is not singular. The Triton path provides a tile-based GPU programming model operating above the level of raw PTX or LLVM IR. Flash Clifford’s Triton implementation demonstrates that the fused GELU-product-RMSNorm kernel maps well to Triton’s blocked execution model, with the 12 grade axis determining the inner loop structure and the batch axis mapping to the outer tile loop. The MLIR GPU dialect path to PTX for NVIDIA targets provides a structured path from MLIR operations to PTX without routing through the full LLVM pipeline. The MLIR-AIE path for AMD’s integrated GPU architecture enables the AI Engine array and RDNA GPU cores to cooperate on workloads that benefit from mixed execution. The PHG’s per-target reachability bitvector handles this partitioning: operations annotated as AI Engine-reachable route to the MLIR-AIE path; operations annotated as GPU-reachable route to the MLIR GPU or Triton path. 

# 5. Physics-Aware Computation 

5.1 Physics-Informed Neural Networks 

Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) [ 16 ] encode physical laws as differentiable loss terms. The DTS framework already provides the mechanism for verifying dimensional consistency of loss terms at compile time. The PHG extends this in two ways specific to physics-aware computation. First, the gradient of a PINN loss function involves both scalar neural network activations and physical field quantities. The chain rule applied across the physics residual term produces gradients with mixed dimensional character: the gradient of a force residual with respect to a position parameter carries dimension N /m = kg /s2. In the PHG, the auto-differentiation graph is a hypergraph because the chain rule applied to multi-input operations (such as the Navier-Stokes momentum equation) produces gradient contributions that are multi-way relations over the same operands as the forward computation. Second, PINNs over geometric domains require that the spatial operators in the physics residual respect the geometric structure of the domain. In PGA or CGA, the surface metric is encoded in the algebra’s quadratic form Q. The PHG’s grade-aware type system can verify at compile time that the operators applied to surface field quantities are grade-preserving with respect to the algebra’s metric. 

5.2 Forward-Mode Automatic Differentiation and the Quire 

Section 6.9 of [9] established that forward-mode automatic differentiation [2] has a specific coeffect signature: no activation tape, O(1) auxiliary memory per layer, with the inner product in the directional derivative computable exactly via the quire accumulator. The PHG extends this analysis to geometric algebra computations. The directional derivative of a geometric algebra function f : Cl (V, Q ) → Cl (V, Q ) in direction v is: 

∇vf (x) = lim 

> t→0

f (x + tv ) − f (x)

t

For polynomial functions in the algebra, this derivative has a closed-form expression in terms of the same algebraic operations as the forward computation. It does not require a backward pass; it is computed by a single forward pass through the computation graph with dual numbers (multivectors augmented with a tangent component). The quire accumulator semantics from Section 3.5 of [ 9] apply to the inner product in the tangent component: the 13 directional derivative involves a dot product between the algebra’s basis and the perturbation direction, and the quire provides exact accumulation for this dot product. The combination of these properties has consequences that extend beyond the immediate geometric algebra context and warrant explicit statement. The elimination of the activation tape means that training requires no more memory than inference: a device capable of running a model forward can now also train it, without any additional allocation proportional to model depth. This is a category change in where and how training can occur, not an incremental efficiency improvement. For cluster-scale training, the relevant architecture is Mixture of Experts (MoE) [ 17 ]. In a sparse MoE model, N expert subnetworks exist but only k are activated per input token, typically k = 1 or k = 2. The standard argument against forward-mode at scale (that per-parameter forward passes require more steps than reverse-mode for high-dimensional parameter spaces) does not apply to the active expert subgraph, whose parameter dimension is Pexpert × k rather than the full model parameter count P . When Pexpert is compact by design (the total parameter count comes from having many experts, not from each expert being large), the forward-mode gradient estimate is tractable with acceptable variance per expert, and the no-tape property applies to each active expert independently. The MoE routing mechanism itself is a native PHG structure. The selection of k active experts from N candidates is a joint constraint over the full candidate set: the assignment must select exactly k experts, and this is a multi-way property of the routing distribution and the input that cannot be decomposed into N independent binary decisions without losing the constraint. In the PHG, the routing decision is an ( N + 1)-to-k hyperedge connecting the routing node and all expert candidate nodes to the k active expert nodes. Expert collapse (the failure mode where the router consistently activates the same experts and the remainder atrophy) is structurally visible in the PHG as a saturation pattern where certain expert nodes are never selected as hyperedge targets. The language server can flag this as a design-time diagnostic during training, surfacing the failure mode before it has progressed to model degradation. Distributed gradient accumulation across workers in cluster training is an accumulation of dot products, precisely the operation the quire makes exact. Current practice uses bfloat16 or float32 accumulation and relies on statistical averaging across workers to manage rounding error. With quire-backed accumulation, the gradient reduction across workers is exact regardless of worker count, rounded once at the end of the accumulation, not once per worker communication step. For training runs spanning thousands of accelerators and hundreds of thousands of steps, this eliminates a systematic source of gradient noise that current frameworks treat as irreducible. The DTS additionally verifies at design time that the gradient of each expert’s loss with respect to its parameters carries the correct dimensional annotations: in a physics-informed MoE where each expert specializes in a distinct physical domain, a gradient update dimensionally inconsistent with that expert’s domain is a design-time error rather than a silent convergence anomaly. 14 5.3 Mesh Topology and the Manifold Constraint 

The “Clean up your Mesh” paper [ 4 ] demonstrates that k-simplices and k-complexes have compact, coordinate-free representations in PGA. The topological consistency of a mesh, specifically the requirement that faces share edges, edges share vertices, and the resulting complex is a valid manifold,is a constraint over sets of simplices, not over individual pairs. In binary graph terms, topological consistency requires asserting the equality of shared boundary elements: if faces F1 and F2 share edge E, then the edge component of F1 and the edge component of F2 must be identical multivectors. In the PHG, this is a three-way constraint: a hyperedge connecting F1, F2, and E asserts that E is the shared boundary as a single relational fact. The BSP correctness problem, where a floating-point comparison against zero determines side-of-plane membership, is resolved in the PHG not by increasing precision but by restructuring the representation so that the relevant equalities are structural (pointer equality in the implementation), not numerical. 

5.4 High-Performance Computing and the MFEM Connection 

The MFEM finite element library provides a framework for high-order PDE solvers on unstructured meshes using the standard coordinate-based approach: vertices are float64 arrays, elements are integer index arrays, and geometric operations require explicit coordi-nate extraction and floating-point arithmetic. The PHG framework provides a path to a MFEM-compatible representation that defers coordinate extraction. The mesh topology is represented as a hypergraph of simplex nodes with grade-annotated PGA multivectors; geometric operations on the mesh are computed from the PGA algebra without coordinate extraction; and coordinates are extracted only when quadrature routines require them, at which point the representation selection function of [ 9 ] can choose IEEE 754, posit, or fixed-point representations appropriate to the dimensional range of the values. 

# 6. The PHG as Design-Time Resource 

6.1 Extended Language Server Protocol 

The PSG’s language server integration exposes dimensional resolution, memory placement, escape analysis diagnostics, and cross-target transfer fidelity as design-time views. The term “design time” is used deliberately throughout this paper to distinguish the Fidelity framework’s feedback model from both runtime detection (errors found during execution) and conventional compile-time detection (errors found when a build is explicitly invoked). In the Fidelity framework, Lattice runs the Composer compiler as a persistent language server process. PSG elaboration, PHG saturation, and SMT-LIB2 proof discharge execute incrementally as source is edited, surfacing diagnostics in the development environment as the engineer writes. The feedback is continuous, not gated on a build step. This matters for the PHG’s geometric algebra diagnostics in a specific way. A grade violation in a Clifford algebra computation (using a grade-2 bivector where a grade-1 vector is required, for example) is not a runtime failure that occurs when the program executes against specific data. It is a structural property of the source code that the PHG’s saturation semantics 15 detect unconditionally, regardless of what data the program would process at runtime. The diagnosis is available at the moment the offending expression is typed. The PHG extends this design-time view with the following geometric algebra-specific annotations. 

Grade resolution display. Every multivector-typed node carries its resolved grade in the PHG. The language server renders this as inline annotations, showing the grade of each intermediate result. For a sequence of PGA operations, the engineer sees which operations produce scalars, vectors, bivectors, trivectors, and pseudoscalars without any manual grade tracking. 

Sparsity profile. For each geometric product hyperedge, the language server displays the number of non-zero Cayley table entries for the specific grade combination, the number of multiplications and additions in the sparse implementation versus the dense implementation, and the percentage reduction. If an engineer uses a general multivector where a specific grade would suffice, the language server shows the performance cost of the grade ambiguity. 

Topological consistency diagnostics. For mesh computation, the language server verifies that all boundary consistency constraints are encoded as PHG hyperedges. Meshes constructed without explicit boundary hyperedges are flagged as potentially topologically inconsistent. 

Co-location compatibility matrix. For spatial dataflow targets, the language server displays the per-target co-location feasibility for each hyperedge: which targets support the required tile configuration, which targets require decomposition into smaller subgraphs, and what the routing topology looks like on each target. 

6.2 Design-Time Physics Verification 

For physics-informed computation, the PHG enables design-time verification that is not possible with the binary PSG. The combination of DTS dimensional constraints and PHG grade constraints allows the compiler to verify at design time that: 

• Physics loss terms are dimensionally well-formed (DTS verification, established in [9]). 

• Geometric operators applied to field quantities preserve grade (PHG grade verification). 

• Boundary conditions encoded in the mesh topology are topologically consistent (PHG hyperedge saturation). 

• Numeric representations selected for field quantities provide adequate precision for the expected value distribution in each mesh element (representation selection, extended from [9] with geometric domain knowledge). Each verification is decidable and operates at design time: DTS dimensional consistency reduces to linear algebra over Z; PHG grade consistency reduces to integer arithmetic; topological consistency reduces to hyperedge saturation; representation selection is a compile-time function over dimensional ranges and target capabilities. 16 6.3 Engineering Consequences 

The properties described in this paper address a class of error that practitioners in high-performance computing, geometric machine learning, and embedded systems engineering encounter repeatedly, often without a systematic solution. 

Grade ambiguity and the cost of overgeneralization. The sparsity profiles reported in Section 3 are not edge cases. A geometric product over a general multivector in 3D PGA, where no grade information is available, requires evaluating all 256 entries of the 16 × 16 Cayley table, 95% of which are structurally zero. An engineer who uses a general-purpose multivector type for a computation that always operates on grade-1 inputs pays a 20 ×

arithmetic overhead that is invisible at the source level. The language server’s sparsity display makes this cost visible at the point where the type is declared, not after profiling has identified a performance regression downstream. 

Topological consistency as a compile-time property. Mesh-based computations in finite element analysis, geometry processing, and physics simulation routinely fail at runtime due to topological inconsistencies: T-junctions where edges should be shared, missing faces in a watertight model, numerical drift that causes coincident vertices to separate. The PHG hyperedge encoding of boundary consistency constraints elevates these from runtime numerical accidents to compile-time structural properties. A mesh that is topologically inconsistent is a program that the PHG cannot saturate correctly. 

Cross-target fidelity as a first-class design property. Systems that transfer numeric results between hardware targets routinely lose precision at the boundary in ways that are not tracked or reported. The DTS cross-target transfer analysis, extended to the PHG context, makes these boundary semantics explicit: the language server reports what precision is lost or transformed at each hardware boundary. The engineer can make an informed decision about whether to rescale, promote, or accept the conversion at that point. 

6.4 Provability Boundaries of the PHG Compute Graph 

A compute graph whose structural properties can be proven at design time, continuously, as source is written, with bounded running time and no execution required,occupies a different engineering category from one whose properties are merely tested at runtime or verified with heuristic confidence. The proofs described in this section are generated and discharged by Lattice’s background elaboration process. They are not post-hoc audits; they are running ahead of the engineer, certifying each expression as it is added to the source. Developers accustomed to languages where correctness is established by testing should note that these are not tests: they are mathematical proofs over all possible inputs, produced as a byproduct of the same elaboration pass that generates the type annotations visible in the editor. A grade inconsistency, a dimensional mismatch in a physics loss term, a tile co-location constraint that exceeds the target’s resources: each of these surfaces as a diagnostic in the development environment at the moment the offending expression is typed, not when a build is invoked and not when the program runs against data. The distinction between “compile time” and “design time” in the Fidelity framework is this: compilation is a discrete step that produces an artifact; design-time elaboration is a continuous service 17 that keeps the engineer informed. Both invoke the same underlying constraint machinery; they differ in when and how the results are presented. 

What the framework proves, unconditionally. Dimensional consistency of the PHG is decidable in polynomial time: constraint generation produces a system of linear equations over Zn; Gaussian elimination over Z solves it and either certifies consistency or reports the first inconsistent constraint. Grade consistency of the PHG is decidable in O(1) per operation: the outer product grade rule δ(a ∧ b) = δ(a) + δ(b) is an integer addition constraint. PHG saturation termination is guaranteed by the monotone fixpoint argument over the finite activation lattice {Fresh < Elaborated < Saturated }.

What the framework verifies with SMT-backed decidability. The DTS constraint system extends to include memory dimension constraints (enumeration sorts), capability coeffect constraints (finite domain reasoning), and target reachability constraints (bitvector arithmetic). These reduce to quantifier-free theories: QF LIA for dimensional constraints, QF UF for sort constraints, and QF BV for reachability. All three are decidable; the SMT queries generated during PHG elaboration are guaranteed to terminate with a definitive answer. Section 6.7 of [ 9 ] establishes this dual-phase model: design-time SMT verification of constraint consistency, and compile-time translation validation that the MLIR lowering preserves the verified properties through each pass. 

Where the boundary lies. The properties described above are first-order properties of the PHG’s type and constraint structure. The framework does not attempt to prove properties of the program’s semantic behavior over arbitrary inputs. Whether a physics-informed neural network trained with dimensionally consistent loss terms will converge, whether a mesh operation produces geometrically correct results for degenerate input configurations, whether a spatial dataflow pipeline will complete within a given latency budget under all possible scheduling decisions: these are properties of runtime behavior and require runtime verification or probabilistic guarantees. This boundary is a consequence of Rice’s theorem. The PHG’s contribution is not to eliminate this boundary but to push as much of the relevant structural verification as possible to the decidable side, so that what remains is a smaller, better-characterized set of unknowns. The practical consequence is that a PHG-annotated Clifford algebra computation targeting the XDNA 2 NPU carries, as design-time certificates available in the editor before any build step: dimensional consistency of all physical quantities involved, grade correctness of all geometric products and joins, topological consistency of all mesh boundary relations, co-location feasibility of all tile assignments relative to the target’s resource constraints, and numeric representation adequacy of all values relative to their dimensional ranges. The engineer does not need to run the program to discover that a grade-2 bivector was passed where a grade-1 vector was required. Lattice knows, and reports it, as the code is written. 

# 7. Related Work 

7.1 Hypergraph Representations in Compilation 

Hypergraph representations in compilation are well established for VLSI placement and routing [ 11 ], where the hyperedge naturally models the multi-way connections of a net. The 18 PHG adapts this representation to the semantic level, where hyperedges carry type and dimensional annotations rather than purely topological connectivity. 

7.2 Geometric Algebra in Compilation and Machine Learning 

The Clifford Group Equivariant Neural Networks (CGENNs) [ 19 ] established the viability of Clifford algebra-based architectures for physical simulation tasks. The Clifford-Steerable CNN work [ 24 ] extended this to equivariance under pseudo-Euclidean groups, and the Flash Clifford repository [ 23 ] addresses the performance gap between theoretical and practical efficiency. None of this prior work integrates grade into a compiler type system; performance optimizations are achieved manually (Flash Clifford, Klein) or through runtime specialization (GAmphetamine, kingdon). The PHG provides the type-theoretic foundation for deriving these optimizations from first principles. The “Clean up your Mesh” work [ 4 ] establishes the k-simplex PHG encoding independently, in the geometric context, without the compilation framework. The mesh paper provides the geometric justification; this paper provides the compilation infrastructure. 

7.3 The DCont/Inet Duality and the PHG as Its Completion 

The DCont/Inet duality [ 7 ] partitions computation expression compilation into two regimes: the DCont regime for sequential effectful computations (monadic structure, actors as sugared DCont), and the Inet regime for pure parallel computations (symmetric monoidal structure, structurally independent reductions). The PHG hyperedge is the Inet active pair generalized to arity k.The grade annotations in the PHG determine which tuples are active: a geometric product of grade-1 and grade-2 elements produces an active pair for the grade-1 output (inner product) and an active triple for the grade-3 output (outer product part of the full product). These are structurally parallel reductions over the Clifford algebra’s grade lattice, and the PHG represents them as simultaneously fireable hyperedges. The Inet dialect for MLIR [ 3 ]implements the three Symmetric Interaction Combinators (Erase, Construct, Duplicate) with declarative rewrite rules. Grade-preserving operations are Constructor applications; grade-annihilating operations (such as a ∧ a = 0 for any grade-1 element a) are Eraser applications; grade-duplicating operations (quire FMA accumulation) are Duplicator applications. 

7.4 The Verse Calculus: Adjacent Territory 

Verse, Epic Games’ functional logic programming language, provides a denotational se-mantics for functional logic programming based on existential variables resolved through unification [ 21 ]. This semantics has a direct correspondence to the Inet path in the Fidelity framework: existential variable resolution is a parallel search over a constraint satisfaction problem. Verse’s unification-based non-determinism and Fidelity’s Inet-path pure parallel reduction work from closely related mathematical structures. The structural differences that are architectural concern the type system and the computation graph. Verse does not carry physical dimensions through compilation: a float in Verse is not a float<newtons> , and the compiler cannot use dimensional range to select posit 19 versus IEEE-754 representations on an FPGA target. This is a genuine architectural gap: the Verse Calculus’s semantics are defined over a domain without dimensional structure. The second structural difference is the computation graph. The Verse Calculus’s existen-tial variable resolution is a binary relation. Multi-way geometric algebra operations, tile co-location constraints, and k-simplex topological consistency constraints are not binary relations. A Verse program operating on PGA multivectors would face the same intermediary node problem that the binary PSG faces: the join of three points to form a plane would require two sequential unification steps with an intermediate line node that carries no geometric meaning. A Clifford dialect with k-ary outer product operations, as proposed in Section 8.6, expresses the three-way join as a single operation with a semantically exact type. The constructive framing is that Verse and Fidelity are building adjacent infrastructure for overlapping problem spaces: the Verse Calculus provides the denotational semantics for the functional logic programming layer that sits above, and the PHG with a proposed Clifford dialect provides the compilation infrastructure that sits below. 

7.5 The Source Language Semantic Ceiling 

A recurring pattern in the heterogeneous compute ecosystem is the attempt to recover semantic structure from programs written in C or C++, either through static analysis, program transformation, or purpose-built intermediate representations derived from the C source. This pattern appears in dataflow graph extraction for spatial accelerators, in CGRA mapping toolchains, and in the analysis passes that feed certain HPC-oriented processor architectures. The structural ceiling on this approach is not a criticism of the engineering involved. It is a consequence of what C and C++ can express and what they cannot. C encodes data dependencies: the structure of the computation as a sequence of operations over arrays and scalars, with order determined by control flow and sizes determined by type declarations. A dataflow graph extracted from C faithfully captures these structural dependencies. What it cannot capture is semantic information that was never in the source: the physical dimensions of the values being computed, the grade structure of the geometric operations, the topological consistency requirements of the mesh being manipulated. C++ templates can encode grade and dimensional information within the C++ type system, as demonstrated by the geometric algebra libraries surveyed in Section 3.4. But C++ templates are resolved by the C++ compiler and discarded before the LLVM intermediate representation is produced. The dimensional annotation on a Boost.Units quantity is enforced at the C++ level and then erased; the LLVM IR produced from that code is dimensionally unaware. C-to-dataflow extraction from C++ code compiled with dimensional template annotations receives the same dimensionally unaware LLVM IR. The erasure boundary is C++’s compilation step, not the dataflow extraction step. The PHG does not extract semantic structure from programs written without it; it preserves semantic structure that was encoded in the source language’s type system and carried through compilation as a design commitment. The design-time detection cost of a semantic error is bounded and systematic; the runtime detection cost is unbounded and contingent on whether the error produces a visible failure or merely a subtly incorrect result. 20 8. Future Work 

8.1 Hypergraph Partitioning Integration 

The most immediate engineering task is integrating an existing hypergraph partitioning algorithm (hMETIS or PaToH) into the MLIR-AIE lowering path, consuming PHG co-location hyperedges as partition constraints and producing tile assignments and route configurations. 

8.2 Garamon and GAALOP Compatibility 

Both Garamon and GAALOP produce C code from algebra specifications. Farscape already generates F# bindings for C libraries. The combination of Garamon’s C++ library generation with Farscape’s binding generation would provide a path for existing Garamon-generated code to be imported into the Fidelity framework with PHG grade annotations, without requiring full reimplementation in Clef. 

8.3 Formal Grade Decidability Proof 

Proposition 3.1 asserts that grade is a DTS dimension axis satisfying the decidability, completeness, and principal types properties of the full DTS system. A formal proof would establish this at the same level of rigor as the existing DTS decidability argument, including the interaction between grade constraints and memory dimension constraints within the unified constraint system. 

8.4 Conformal vs. Projective Algebra Target Selection 

CGA ( R4,1) and PGA ( R3,0,1) serve different geometric computation purposes. The represen-tation selection function of [ 9] could be extended to algebra selection: given a computation’s geometric primitive types, the compiler could select the appropriate algebra and emit the corresponding MLIR. This would make the choice of projective versus conformal model a compile-time optimization rather than an architectural decision made at the source code level. 

8.5 Quantum-Classical Compilation and the PHG 

The structural arguments in this paper for geometric algebra and spatial dataflow mapping generalize to a third domain that warrants explicit identification, though its realization depends on developments in quantum hardware that remain in progress. Fault-tolerant quantum computing proposals, particularly those based on topological error correction codes such as the surface code and color code, use syndrome measurements that are intrinsically multi-way operations. A surface code syndrome measurement checks the parity of four data qubits simultaneously; the measurement outcome is a joint property of all four qubits, not of any pairwise subset. In the PHG, this is a 4-to-1 hyperedge: 

f =  {q1, q 2, q 3, q 4}, syndrome , λ SX



21 where λSX carries the stabilizer group element ˆSX = X1 ⊗X2 ⊗X3 ⊗X4 as a type annotation. The correctness of the syndrome measurement is a structural property of the hyperedge, verifiable by the PHG’s saturation semantics, rather than an emergent property of a sequence of binary operations. The DTS’s representation selection infrastructure has a specific and quantifiable application in quantum amplitude arithmetic. Quantum state amplitudes are complex numbers whose magnitudes concentrate near zero and one: superposition states have amplitudes near 1 /√2 ,and amplitudes near zero represent states that are almost certainly unobserved. The posit arithmetic representation, with its tapered precision concentrated near unity, matches this distribution directly. For posit32 compared to float32 in the near-unity region, the relative error advantage is approximately two orders of magnitude, and this advantage accumulates across sequential gate operations. Unitarity preservation (the requirement that every gate operation maintain the quantum state’s 2-norm at exactly 1.0) is a dimensional constraint in the DTS sense: it is an invariant over the amplitude vector’s norm that the SMT-LIB2 verification infrastructure can express and discharge at elaboration time. A quantum backend for the Fidelity compilation pipeline would require a QIR-compatible MLIR lowering path, the development of which is contingent on the maturation of fault-tolerant quantum hardware targets. The framework’s existing properties (posit arithmetic for amplitude precision, PHG hyperedge structure for multi-qubit joint operations and syndrome measurements, and PSG-level proof generation for structural correctness) are present for reasons independent of quantum computing and compose naturally in a quantum-classical context. We identify this as a well-motivated direction for future investigation; prior published work from this project has examined the structural connections in more detail [ 8]. 

8.6 A Proposed Clifford Dialect 

The Fidelity framework has intentionally avoided introducing custom MLIR dialects, relying instead on the established dialect ecosystem: DCont and Inet for computation expression compilation, SCF and MemRef for control and memory, LLVM for native code generation, CIRCT for FPGA synthesis, and MLIR-AIE for spatial dataflow targeting. This restraint is correct as a general principle. Custom dialects introduce maintenance burden, create barriers to inter-framework interoperability, and complicate the reasoning about the compilation pipeline’s invariants. We believe, however, that a Clifford dialect would constitute a principled and necessary exception, and we propose it here as a concrete direction for future development. Every other computation in the Fidelity pipeline can be expressed in terms of existing MLIR primitives without information loss, because the grade annotations that guide compilation reside in the PSG as codata and are consumed before the MLIR emission step. A geometric product is different in character. Its grade contribution structure is not expressible in the 

arith dialect without either materializing the full Cayley table (which is 85–95% sparse and loses all algebraic provenance) or introducing an explicit intermediate representation that carries grade information as dialect attributes. We believe a Clifford dialect would be that intermediate representation: the one level in the lowering pipeline where grade would be a first-class MLIR type parameter rather than PSG codata. 22 A minimal proposed operation set for such a dialect would include: clifford.gp (geometric product, with set-valued grade annotation on the result), clifford.op (outer product, grade addition with zero-annihilation), clifford.ip (inner product, grade subtraction), 

clifford.sandwich (grade-preserving rotation/reflection product), clifford.meet (regres-sive product, grade complementation), clifford.grade select (grade projection, used at coordinate extraction boundaries), and clifford.norm (metric norm extraction, output grade 0). Each operation would carry the algebra specification (metric signature p, q, r and dimension n) as an invariant attribute. We anticipate that such a dialect, if developed, would enable a flat, tractable compute graph at the MiddleEnd level: grade-annotated geometric operations with no Cayley table indirection and no runtime specialization cost, from which target-specific lowering paths could diverge with grade information intact. On CPU targets, grade annotations would guide SIMD intrinsic selection; on GPU targets via Triton, they would determine warp-aligned kernel structure; on FPGA targets via CIRCT, they would constrain arithmetic pipeline synthesis; on NPU targets via MLIR-AIE, they would interact with PHG co-location hyperedges to assign grade-specific computations to AI Engine tiles. Whether this pipeline flattening holds in practice across all four target paths is a question that requires implementation and measurement; we present it here as a well-motivated hypothesis grounded in the analysis of Section 3.2 and the empirical results of Flash Clifford [23]. 

8.7 Neuromorphic Targets and Temporal Hyperedges 

Neuromorphic processors, including Intel Loihi-2 and the broader family of spiking neural network hardware, present a class of computation that the PHG formalism describes more naturally than any existing neuromorphic programming framework. The structural gap in current tooling is precisely located and the path to closing it follows directly from the foundations established in this paper. The fundamental computational primitive of a spiking neural network is coincidence detection: a neuron fires when sufficiently many presynaptic inputs spike within a temporal window τ .For a neuron with N presynaptic inputs that fires when k of them spike within τ , the firing event is a joint property of the full k-tuple of arriving spikes, not of any individual input. The natural representation in the PHG is a k-to-1 hyperedge: 

f =  {s1, s 2, . . . , s k}, fire , λ τ



where λτ carries the temporal window constraint max i ti − min i ti ≤ τ with dimensional annotation ⟨ms ⟩. PHG saturation fires only when all k source spike nodes are present and the temporal constraint is satisfied. This is the correct formal model for coincidence detection, and it is not expressible as a set of binary edges without loss of the joint temporal constraint. No current neuromorphic programming framework, including Intel’s Lava, PyNN, or NEST, represents this constraint as a typed structural property. Coincidence windows and membrane time constants are unitless floats calibrated by convention; their dimensional consistency across network layers is neither declared nor verified. The DTS provides the mechanism for dimensional verification of temporal dynamics directly. The membrane time constant τm carries annotation ⟨ms ⟩, the firing threshold carries 23 annotation ⟨mV ⟩, and the synaptic weight carries the derived annotation ⟨mV · ms −1⟩. A network whose temporal dynamics are dimensionally inconsistent across layers is a design-time error under the same inference machinery that verifies physical dimensions in PINN loss terms. Time is a dimension axis in the DTS abelian group framework; the extension to neuromorphic computation requires no new formal machinery. Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity (STDP), the dominant local learning rule for spiking networks, has a coeffect signature that parallels forward-mode automatic differentiation. The weight update at each synapse depends only on the relative timing of pre- and postsynaptic spikes, which are locally available without a global error signal or activation tape. Each synapse requires O(1) auxiliary state (one trace variable per spike direction), and Loihi-2 implements STDP in hardware via an on-chip learning engine that maintains these traces without off-chip memory access. The DMM coeffect discipline verifies the stack-eligible allocation of STDP trace variables at design time, with the same machinery that verifies forward-mode gradient allocation in Section 5.2. The lowering path from PHG-annotated neuromorphic computations to Loihi-2 follows the same structure as the MLIR-AIE lowering path for NPU targets. Two extensions to the PHG hyperedge vocabulary are required: the temporal coincidence hyperedge described above, and an STDP learning hyperedge annotating each synapse with the learning rate and time constant parameters A+, A−, τ+, τ− with their dimensional annotations. The lowering pass consumes these annotations and emits the corresponding NxCore API calls configuring neuron compartment thresholds, membrane time constants, and learning engine parameters. The PHG’s per-target reachability bitvector handles heterogeneous deployments naturally: a network partitioned across Loihi-2 (for event-driven temporal processing), XDNA 2 (for dense geometric algebra computation), and CPU (for coordination) is a single PHG with per-node reachability annotations, lowered through NxCore, MLIR-AIE, and LLVM from the same shared intermediate representation. The warm rotation architecture of Section 8.3 applies to neuromorphic actors within the Olivier constellation. STDP-trained weights update continuously on-chip via Loihi-2’s learning engine. Because each weight update is local and the DMM coeffect discipline bounds the auxiliary state per synapse, the memory footprint of the learning process is deterministic and verifiable at design time. When the weight configuration warrants registration as a new model version, the versioning infrastructure issues the corresponding PHG structural certificate and post-quantum signed record, preserving continuous local adaptation alongside discrete certified versioning. 

8.8 BAREWire Geometric Serialization 

BAREWire, the Fidelity framework’s implementation of the BARE binary protocol for IPC and network interchange, currently serializes scalar and tensor data. Extending BAREWire to handle multivector serialization with grade-annotated fields would allow geometric compu-tation results to be transmitted between processes with their algebraic structure preserved, enabling distributed geometric computation pipelines where each process operates on a specific grade subspace and the full multivector is assembled at the boundary. 24 9. Conclusion 

The Program Hypergraph is a principled and minimally intrusive generalization of the Program Semantic Graph. It preserves all existing PSG properties, adding hyperedges of arity greater than one for computations that cannot be correctly represented as sequences of binary relations without information loss. The central technical claims of this paper are: that grade in Clifford algebra is a natural DTS dimension axis, derivable through the existing inference machinery; that the geometric product sparsity implied by grade inference eliminates the primary computational objection to Clifford algebra neural networks, at compile time, without manual specialization; that the k-simplex structure of mesh topology is a direct PHG hyperedge encoding that provides exact geometric predicate evaluation without floating-point comparison; and that spatial dataflow architecture mapping requires hyperedge co-location constraints that cannot be correctly expressed as binary cliques. The assessment of the existing geometric algebra library ecosystem reveals a consistent gap: no existing system integrates grade as a first-class type-level property that survives into a compiler’s semantic graph, participates in memory placement and representation selection decisions, and is exposed through a language server protocol. The PHG fills this gap within the Fidelity compilation framework, extending the design-time analysis capabilities established in [9] to geometric correctness, topological consistency, and spatial co-location. The convergence of these properties in a single graph structure, one that the engineer navigates through the same language server interface that surfaces dimensional diagnostics and escape analysis,is the practical consequence. Physics-informed computation, geometric algebra neural networks, and spatial accelerator mapping are three distinct application domains with a common structural requirement: multi-way constraints over sets of computation nodes. The PHG provides the representation; the DTS+DMM inference machinery provides the analysis; the Fidelity compilation pipeline provides the execution path. 

# Acknowledgments 

The author thanks John L. Gustafson for direct support on posit arithmetic and value distribution analysis. The treatment of quire-backed gradient accumulation in Section 5.2 and the posit representation selection for geometric algebra field quantities reflect his technical guidance. The author also thanks Paul Snively for his input on the geometric algebra problem space and for opening lines of investigation that this paper pursues. The author also thanks Martin Coll, whose work on the Inet dialect for MLIR informed the DCont/Inet duality analysis in Section 1.4 and the interaction net generalization that motivated the PHG hyperedge thesis. 

# Software Availability 

The Clef language, Composer compiler, and supporting libraries described in this paper are developed under the Fidelity Framework project. Source repositories are available at 

https://github.com/FidelityFramework . The language specification, design rationale, 25 and compiler documentation are published at https://clef-lang.com . All components referenced in this paper, including the PHG saturation engine, grade inference pipeline, and BAREWire interchange protocol, are under active development. 

# References 

[1] AMD/Xilinx. MLIR-AIE: An MLIR-based toolchain for AMD AI engines, 2024. github. com/Xilinx/mlir-aie .[2] A. G. Baydin, B. A. Pearlmutter, D. Syme, F. Wood, and P. Torr. Gradients without backpropagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08587 , 2022. [3] M. Coll. Inet dialect: Declarative rewrite rules for interaction nets. MLIR Open Design Meeting, April 2025. University of Buenos Aires. [4] S. De Keninck, M. Roelfs, L. Dorst, and D. Eelbode. Clean up your mesh! Part 1: Plane and simplex. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08058 , 2025. [5] L. Dorst and S. De Keninck. A guided tour to the plane-based geometric algebra PGA, version 2.0, 2022. bivector.net/PGA4CS.html .[6] B. Gavranovi´ c, P. Lessard, A. Dudzik, T. von Glehn, J. G. M. Ara´ ujo, and P. Veliˇ ckovi´ c. Position: Categorical deep learning is an algebraic theory of all architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15332 , 2024. [7] H. Haynes. The DCont/Inet duality: How computation expressions decompose into fundamental compilation patterns. SpeakEZ Technologies, 2025. speakez.tech/blog/ dcont-inet-duality/ .[8] H. Haynes. Quantum optionality and the precision problem. Clef Language Framework blog, 2026. clef-lang.com/blog/quantum-optionality/ .[9] H. Haynes. Dimensional type systems and deterministic memory management: Design-time semantic preservation in native compilation. SpeakEZ Technologies, 2026. [10] B. Kang, H. Desai, L. Jia, and B. Lucia. WAMI: Compilation to WebAssembly through MLIR without losing abstraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16048 , 2025. [11] G. Karypis and V. Kumar. Multilevel k-way hypergraph partitioning. VLSI Design ,11(3):285–300, 2000. [12] A. Kennedy. Types for units-of-measure: Theory and practice. In Central European Functional Programming School , LNCS 6299. Springer, 2009. [13] C. Lattner et al. MLIR: Scaling compiler infrastructure for domain specific computation. In Proceedings of CGO , 2021. [14] J. Ong. Klein: A fast geometric algebra library for 3D PGA, 2020. github.com/ jeremyong/Klein .[15] T. Petricek, D. Orchard, and A. Mycroft. Coeffects: A calculus of context-dependent computation. In Proceedings of ICFP , 2014. 26 [16] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear PDEs. Journal of Computational Physics , 378:686–707, 2019. [17] N. Shazeer, A. Mirhoseini, K. Maziarz, A. Davis, Q. Le, G. Hinton, and J. Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538 , 2017. [18] A. Rico et al. AMD XDNA NPU in Ryzen AI processors. IEEE Micro , 44(6):73–83, 2024. [19] D. Ruhe, J. Brandstetter, and P. Forr´ e. Clifford group equivariant neural networks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11141 , 2023. [20] D. Sarkar, O. Waddell, and R. K. Dybvig. A nanopass infrastructure for compiler education. In Proceedings of ICFP ’04 , pages 201–212. ACM, 2004. [21] S. Peyton Jones, K. Claessen, R. Jhala, T. Sweeney, L. Augustsson, and O. Shivers. The Verse calculus: A core calculus for functional logic programming. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 7(ICFP), 2023. [22] P. Colapinto. Versor: A fast, lightweight C++ library for geometric algebra. University of California Santa Barbara, 2014. wolftype.github.io/versor .[23] M. Zhdanov. Flash Clifford: Hardware-efficient implementation of Clifford algebra neural networks. github.com/maxxxzdn/flash-clifford , 2025. [24] M. Zhdanov, D. Ruhe, M. Weiler, A. Lucic, J. Brandstetter, and P. Forr´ e. Clifford-steerable convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of ICML , 2024. [25] biVector.net geometric algebra library catalog, 2025. bivector.net/lib.html .

# A. Grade Inference Example 

Consider an unannotated Clef function computing the area of a triangle from three PGA points. The function takes three grade-1 homogeneous point coordinates in R3,0,1 and returns a scalar area value with dimension m 2. The body performs two successive outer product joins, then extracts the pseudoscalar magnitude. In the PSG binary edge model, the inference proceeds through three nodes. The first outer product of two grade-1 points produces a grade-2 line node. The second outer product of that line with the third point produces a grade-3 trivector node. The magnitude extraction produces the scalar output. The intermediate line node participates in four binary edges: two from the first join, one to the second join, and one implicit dependency edge for the magnitude extraction. In the PHG, the triangle join is a single hyperedge: 

f =  {p1, p 2, p 3}, face , λ ∧



where δ(face) = 3 follows from the joint grade constraint δ(p1) + δ(p2) + δ(p3) = 1 + 1 + 1 = 3. The intermediate line node does not exist in the PHG representation. The triangle is a 27 direct three-way join, and its correctness is a property of all three source nodes jointly. The sparsity consequence is concrete. In the binary PSG encoding, the second join considers the full grade-2 bivector space (6 components) acting on the grade-1 vector space (4 components), producing 24 Cayley table entries of which only 11 are non-zero. The PHG encoding observes grade-3 as the direct output of the three-way join and emits the determinant of the 3 × 3 matrix of point homogeneous coordinates: 6 multiplications and 5 additions, with no table indirection. Property Value Output type float ⟨m2⟩, grade-3 trivector in R3,0,1

Hyperedge arity 3-to-1, joint grade constraint 1 + 1 + 1 = 3 Non-zero Cayley entries 11 of 24 (54% reduction vs. dense evaluation) x86 64 representation float64, 11 multiplications + 5 additions Xilinx FPGA representation posit32 (es=2), range [10 −6, 10 4] m 2 covered Quire applicability 6 FMA operations; exact accumulation on posit targets Precision gain vs. float32 ∼3× in the [10 −3, 10 1] m 2 subrange The cross-target representation difference is a consequence of the dimensional range annota-tion. The value distribution of physical triangle areas in a mesh, typically between 10 −3

and 10 1 m2 after normalization to a characteristic length scale, lies well within posit32’s high-precision near-unity region. The DTS representation selection function selects posit32 for the FPGA target because this dimensional range analysis, not a user annotation, justifies it. 

# B. Co-location Hyperedge Example 

Consider a convolution operation over a spatial feature map, to be mapped to a 2 × 2 tile configuration on the XDNA 2 NPU. The computation decomposes into four pipeline stages: a load stage ( A) that fetches input feature data from external memory, two compute stages (B, C) that perform partial accumulations in parallel, and a reduce stage ( D) that combines their outputs and writes the result. The PHG co-location hyperedge for this pipeline is: 

f =  {load A, compute B , compute C , reduce D}, output , λ tile 



Annotation field Value Source set cardinality 4 (2 × 2 tile block) Route topology A → B, A → C, B → D, C → D (reduction tree) DMA constraint load A and reduce D share a DMA channel Synchronization reduce D waits for both compute B and compute C

The route topology for the four pipeline stages is shown in Figure 2. 28 load A 

> tile (0,0)
> compute B
> tile (0,1)
> compute C
> tile (1,0)
> reduce D
> tile (1,1)

output 

> DMA

Figure 2: Route topology for the 2 ×2 tile co-location hyperedge. The DMA channel (dashed) connects load A and reduce D directly, in addition to the data flow through compute stages B

and C.PHG saturation fires when all four nodes are assigned target resources. The MLIR-AIE lowering pass consumes the hyperedge annotation and emits the tile kernel code, DMA buffer descriptors, and synchronization primitives for this specific topology. Expressing the same constraint as six pairwise co-location edges ( A-B, A-C, A-D, B-C,

B-D, C-D) plus a separate synchronization annotation on D encodes a strictly weaker statement: it asserts that each pair must be co-located independently, which does not entail that all four are co-located as a unit. The hyperedge encoding is the correct statement of the constraint. The binary clique encoding is an approximation that produces the same result when all six pairwise constraints are satisfied simultaneously, but cannot distinguish “all four on the same tile block” from “each pair satisfies a weaker adjacency requirement.” 29