Title: Dimensional Type Systems and Deterministic Memory Management: Design-Time Semantic Preservation in Native Compilation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.16437v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Mar 2026 01:07:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
Dimensional Type Systems and Deterministic Memory Management: Design-Time Semantic Preservation in Native Compilation 

Houston Haynes SpeakEZ Technologies, Asheville, NC 

hhaynes2@alumni.unca.edu 

March 2026 

Abstract 

We present a compilation framework in which dimensional type annotations persist through multi-stage MLIR lowering, enabling the compiler to jointly resolve numeric repre-sentation selection and deterministic memory management as coeffect properties of a single program semantic graph (PSG). The coupling between these two concerns is the central contribution: dimensional inference determines value ranges; value ranges determine represen-tation selection; representation selection determines word width and memory footprint; and memory footprint, combined with escape classification, determines allocation strategy, cache behavior, and cross-target transfer fidelity. Each step in this chain consumes the output of the preceding inference. The Dimensional Type System (DTS) extends Hindley–Milner unification with constraints drawn from finitely generated abelian groups, yielding dimensional inference that is decidable in polynomial time, complete (no annotations required), and principal. Where conventional systems erase dimensional annotations before code generation, DTS carries them as com-pilation metadata through each lowering stage, making them available at the point where representation selection and memory placement decisions occur. The dimensional range of computed values guides per-target format choice: posit arithmetic with tapered precision on FPGA targets, IEEE 754 on general-purpose CPUs, or fixed-point on neuromorphic cores. Deterministic Memory Management (DMM), formalized as a coeffect discipline within the same graph, unifies escape analysis and memory placement with the dimensional framework. The escape analysis classifies value lifetimes into four categories (stack-scoped, closure-captured, return-escaping, byref-escaping), each mapping to a specific allocation strategy verified at compile time. For posit targets, the quire accumulator’s allocation, lifetime, and exact accumulation semantics are resolved as coeffect properties within the PSG. We identify implications for auto-differentiation: the dimensional algebra is closed under the chain rule, and forward-mode gradient computation [ 3] exhibits a specific coeffect signature (no activation tape, O(1) auxiliary memory per layer) that the framework can verify. The practical consequence is a development environment where escape diagnostics, allocation strategy, representation fidelity, and cache locality estimation are design-time views over the compilation graph. 

# 1 Introduction 

1.1 Dimensional Annotation Lifetime 

Contemporary type systems for numeric computation differ in how long dimensional information remains available during compilation. Systems with dimensional annotations (F#’s Units of Measure [ 13 ], Boost.Units in C++ [ 23 ]) discard those annotations before code generation. The dimensional information serves as a compile-time check and then vanishes; the emitted code is dimensionally unaware. We refer to this as early erasure : the annotations are consumed during type checking and do not survive to the compilation stages where representation selection and memory placement decisions occur. Systems with rich dependent types (F* [ 26 ], Idris [ 4 ], Agda [ 17 ]) preserve type-level information into generated code, but at the cost of decidability: type checking in the general dependent case is undecidable, and practical systems rely on SMT solvers with timeout heuristics. 1

> arXiv:2603.16437v1 [cs.PL] 17 Mar 2026

Neither approach satisfies the requirements of systems that interface with physical reality across heterogeneous hardware targets. A sensor fusion pipeline running on an x86 host, an FPGA accelerator, and a neuromorphic processor needs dimensional constraints that persist through compilation long enough to guide memory placement and inform cross-target data transfer protocols. Early erasure discards this information before it can be used. Full dependent types provide interactive development environments in practice (Lean 4, Agda, Idris 2), but their type checking is undecidable in general, and practical systems rely on timeout heuristics and fuel limits for solver-backed verification. DTS takes a middle path: dimensional annotations persist as compilation metadata through multi-stage lowering, available at each stage where they inform decisions, and are dropped before native code emission. The annotations do not exist at runtime; there is no reified type information, no typeof , and no runtime dispatch on dimensions. The distinction from early erasure is annotation lifetime, not reification. DTS’s restriction to decidable algebraic theories (abelian groups over Z, enum sorts, bitvector constraints) guarantees bounded-time inference for every query, a property that simplifies language server architecture and enables unconditional response-time guarantees for design-time tooling. The tradeoff is expressiveness: DTS cannot encode arbitrary predicates. The decidability guarantee enables a specific category of design-time feedback: multi-target resolution, memory placement analysis, escape diagnostics, and representation fidelity scoring. Encoding these compilation-internal properties as types in a dependent system would impose an overhead that is architecturally unnecessary when the compiler already computes these properties during normal elaboration. 

1.2 Contribution 

This paper makes three claims: 1. Dimensional annotations that persist through compilation enable joint resolution of representation selection and memory management. This coupling is the central contribution and the reason DTS and DMM share a paper. Dimensional inference deter-mines value ranges; value ranges determine representation selection; representation selection determines word width and memory footprint; memory footprint, combined with escape classification, determines allocation strategy, cache behavior, and cross-target transfer fidelity. These decisions compose within the Program Semantic Graph (PSG) as coeffect properties, and the chain cannot be decomposed without losing information that flows between stages. The algebraic foundation is a finitely generated abelian group over Z, which places DTS in a specific formal niche: decidable in polynomial time, fully inferrable via extension of Hindley–Milner unification, and preservable as metadata through multi-stage compilation without altering the generated code’s operational semantics. This niche is distinct from both dependent types and parametric polymorphism (Section 2.4). 2. The inference machinery derives composition-dependent properties that determine downstream compilation decisions. Dimensional annotations can enter the system through multiple paths: Hindley–Milner inference from unannotated source code (the default), explicit programmer annotation, domain library bindings (e.g., a physics library that pre-populates dimensional constraints), or external tooling including AI-assisted code generation. The compilation pipeline’s behavior is identical regardless of provenance. The inference contribution is not annotation convenience; it is the derivation of properties that emerge from constraint interaction across the program graph. Dimensional range, escape classification, and representation compatibility are composition-dependent: they cannot be determined from any single value’s annotation but arise from the interaction of constraints at function boundaries, loop nesting, and cross-module interfaces. These derived properties jointly determine representation selection, word width, allocation strategy, and cache behavior. 23. The unified DTS+DMM graph enables a novel category of software design-time tooling. Because the PSG retains dimensional and memory annotations through compilation, a language server can surface the compiler’s internal analysis as interactive design guidance: escape analysis diagnostics, allocation promotion warnings, cache locality estimates, and restructuring suggestions. This transforms the compilation graph from a transient build artifact into a persistent design-time resource. 

1.3 Scope and Context 

The system described here is implemented in the Clef programming language and the Fidelity compilation framework. Clef is a functional language in the ML family whose primary syntactic and semantic lineage is F#, but several other systems were formative in its design. F* [ 26 ]demonstrated that representation width and type identity could be treated as independent concerns, a separation that directly informed Clef’s approach to dimensional preservation: the type carries the physical semantics while the representation (posit width, float format, fixed-point configuration) is resolved independently per target. F*’s use of SMT-LIB2 [ 2] for automated proof discharge also established the feasibility of integrating solver-backed verification into an ML-family workflow, a pattern that informs the Fidelity framework’s constraint architecture. OCaml’s module system and its approach to abstract types influenced the design of Clef’s compilation unit boundaries. The Fidelity compiler’s multi-pass architecture draws on the nanopass methodology [ 22 ], originally developed in Scheme, which demonstrated that decompos-ing compilation into many small, independently verifiable transformations produces compilers that are easier to extend and reason about. The Fidelity framework compiles Clef source through a canonical MLIR middle-end (Com-poser) that fans out to multiple backend pathways: LLVM for CPU, GPU, MCU, and WebAssem-bly targets; CIRCT for FPGA synthesis via vendor toolchains (e.g., Vivado); and MLIR-AIE for AI Engine architectures. The dimensional and coeffect annotations described in this paper are carried through this fan-out as PSG codata, available to every lowering path. The design-time tooling is provided by Lattice (compiler services and language server protocol implementation) and Atelier (integrated development environment). Throughout this paper, we use Clef syntax for examples, but the formal properties of DTS and DMM are language-independent. The binary PSG described in this paper is generalized in companion work [ 8] to a Program Hypergraph (PHG), where the same inference machinery extends to grade inference over Clifford algebras and co-location constraints for spatial dataflow targets. The PHG introduces k-ary hyperedges that capture irreducible multi-way relations, including geometric products, tile assign-ment constraints, and DMA route configurations, that the binary PSG cannot represent without introducing semantically empty intermediate nodes. Where the present paper demonstrates the DTS/DMM coupling for scalar and tensor workloads, the PHG paper extends the argument to geometric algebra neural networks and physics-aware computation, with direct implications for the continuous learning and spatial partitioning applications of forward-mode automatic differentiation. 

# 2 Dimensional Type Systems: Formal Characterization 

2.1 Algebraic Foundation 

A dimensional type system assigns to each numeric value a dimension drawn from a finitely generated free abelian group. The base dimensions (length, time, mass, temperature, electric current, luminous intensity, amount of substance) generate the group under multiplication, with integer exponents. Formally, let D = Zn be the dimension space, where n is the number of base dimensions. 3Each dimension d ∈ D is a vector of integer exponents: 

dvelocity = (1 , −1, 0, 0, . . . ) (length 1 · time −1) (1) 

dforce = (1 , −2, 1, 0, . . . ) (length 1 · time −2 · mass 1) (2) Dimensional consistency of an arithmetic expression reduces to linear algebra over Z: addition requires operand dimensions to be equal; multiplication adds exponent vectors; division subtracts them; exponentiation scales them. These operations are closed in Zn and decidable in O(n) per operation. This is the critical distinction from dependent types. A dependent type can encode an arbitrary predicate over values. Checking whether two dependent types are equal may require proving an arbitrary theorem. Dimensional consistency checking requires comparing two integer vectors, a constant-time operation per base dimension. 

2.2 Inference via Extended Hindley–Milner Unification 

F#’s Units of Measure system [ 13 ] demonstrated that dimensional constraints integrate naturally with Hindley–Milner type inference. The extension is direct: type variables carry an associated dimension variable; unification of type variables propagates to unification of dimension variables; dimension unification reduces to solving systems of linear equations over Z.The inference algorithm proceeds as follows: 1. Constraint generation. Each arithmetic operation generates a dimensional constraint. Addition of a + b generates d(a) = d(b). Multiplication of a * b generates d(result ) = 

d(a) + d(b).2. Unification. Dimensional constraints form a system of linear equations over Zn. The system is solved by Gaussian elimination over Z, yielding either a unique solution, a parametric family of solutions (dimensional polymorphism), or no solution (dimensional inconsistency). 3. Generalization. Unsolved dimension variables in a function’s type are generalized to dimension parameters, producing dimensionally polymorphic functions. A function let scale factor value = factor * value infers type float<’d1> -> float<’d2> -> float<’d1 * ’d2> without any annotation. The inference is complete (every dimensionally consistent program can be typed without annotation), principal (the inferred type is the most general), and decidable (the constraint system is finite and the solution algorithm terminates). These properties are shared with standard Hindley–Milner inference and are not shared with dependent type inference in general. 

Annotation provenance and composition-dependent properties. Dimensional annota-tions can enter the system through several paths: HM inference from unannotated source (the default described above), explicit programmer annotation, domain library bindings that pre-populate dimensional constraints for specific fields (e.g., a planned Fidelity.Physics library), or external tooling including AI-assisted code generation. The compilation pipeline treats all annotations identically regardless of provenance; the downstream representation selection and memory management decisions are the same whether a dimension was inferred or declared. The inference machinery’s contribution extends beyond annotation convenience. The chain from dimensional constraint through range analysis, representation selection, word width, and cache behavior produces composition-dependent properties : properties that emerge from constraint interaction across the program graph and cannot be determined from any individual value’s annotation. A function that multiplies a mass by an acceleration inherits a force dimension, and the range of the result is bounded by the product of the input ranges, which in 4turn constrains the posit or IEEE 754 format that the compiler selects. These derived ranges, escape classifications, and representation compatibilities propagate through function boundaries, loop nesting, and cross-module interfaces. Companion work on the Program Hypergraph [ 8 ]demonstrates a concrete case: grade inference in Clifford algebra, using the same constraint machinery, identifies that approximately 95% of the Cayley table entries are structurally zero for typical grade combinations in 3D Projective Geometric Algebra, producing a 20 × code generation improvement that no per-value annotation could provide. 

2.3 Preservation Through Multi-Stage Compilation 

The defining property of DTS, as distinct from F#’s Units of Measure, is that dimensional annotations persist through compilation. In F#, units are discarded during IL generation; a float<meters> becomes a float64 in the emitted Common Intermediate Language. This is early erasure: dimensions serve as compile-time checks and are then discarded before the compilation stages where they could inform representation selection or memory placement. In DTS, dimensions are carried as attributes through the compilation pipeline: 

Stage 1: Source → Typed AST. Dimensional inference produces a fully annotated AST where every numeric expression carries its resolved dimension. 

Stage 2: Typed AST → PSG. The Program Semantic Graph preserves dimensional annotations as node attributes. The PSG is the central data structure for both compilation and design-time services; dimensional information in the PSG is accessible to the language server for design-time resolution display. 

Stage 3: PSG → MLIR. The PSG carries dimensional annotations and coeffects as codata: node-level attributes computed during PSG elaboration and saturation, then observed during the code generation traversal. Alex (the compiler targeting layer) traverses the enriched PSG via a zipper and emits MLIR using portable dialects (memref, arith, func). The dimensional and coeffect information resides in the PSG as codata; it guides the MLIR emission but is not itself encoded into the MLIR representation. 

Stage 4: MLIR → Target-specific lowering. The MLIR emitted in Stage 3 fans out to backend-specific lowering pipelines: the LLVM dialect for CPU, GPU, MCU, and WebAssembly targets; CIRCT dialects for FPGA synthesis; or MLIR-AIE dialects for AI Engine architectures. By this point, the dimensional and coeffect codata from the PSG has already guided representation selection: a float<meters> may have been lowered to float64 on x86 via the LLVM backend, 

posit<32,2> on an FPGA target via CIRCT, or fixed<24,signed> on a neuromorphic core. 

Stage 5: Target dialect → Machine code. At the final lowering stage, dimensional attributes are no longer needed for code generation and are lowered to debug metadata (DWARF annotations on x86, equivalent metadata on other targets). The dimensions do not affect the operational semantics of the generated code; they are metadata that can be consumed by debuggers, profilers, and post-mortem analysis tools. This preservation model has a specific property: dimensions never influence control flow or data layout in a way that could cause divergence between a dimensioned and undimensioned compilation of the same program. The generated instructions are identical; only the metadata and target-specific numeric representation selections differ. This is weaker than full dependent type preservation (where type information can affect runtime behavior) but stronger than early erasure (where dimensional information is discarded before the compilation stages where it could inform representation and memory decisions). 52.4 DTS is Not Dependent Typing 

The relationship between DTS and dependent type systems warrants careful delineation, as imprecise classification would position DTS as a restricted dependent type system. This mischaracterizes the algebraic structure. Table 1: Comparison of DTS and dependent type systems.                   

> Property DTS Dependent Types
> Type checking Decidable (linear algebra over Z)Undecidable in general Inference Complete and principal Incomplete; requires annotations Runtime representation No runtime cost; metadata only May require runtime witnesses Expressiveness Abelian group constraints on numeric types Arbitrary predicates over values Proof obligations None (consistency is syntactic) May require interactive proof Compilation model Attributes that guide code generation Types that participate in code generation

A dependent type system can encode dimensional constraints (one can define Vector (n : Nat) in Idris and enforce length-indexed operations). But the encoding uses the full power of dependent types to express a constraint that DTS captures with a restricted algebraic structure. The restriction is not a limitation; it is the source of the decidability, completeness, and inference properties that make DTS practical for interactive design-time tooling. The analogy is to regular expressions and context-free grammars. Regular expressions are not “restricted CFGs”; they are a distinct formal class with distinct closure properties, distinct recognition algorithms, and distinct practical applications. DTS occupies an analogous position relative to dependent types: a distinct formal class that happens to overlap in expressive power for a specific domain (dimensional constraints on numeric values) but differs in every computational property that matters for practical tooling. 

2.5 Extension: Memory Dimensions 

The DTS framework extends naturally beyond physical units. Any constraint domain that forms a finitely generated abelian group can be encoded as a dimension. Memory space identifiers (stack, arena, heap, specific hardware memory regions) form such a group under a trivial multiplication (the “product” of two memory spaces is the pair of constraints that both must be satisfied). More precisely, memory dimensions do not form an abelian group under the same arithmetic as physical dimensions. They form an enumeration sort in the SMT sense: a finite set of values with equality but no arithmetic. The dimensional algebra handles this by assigning memory dimensions to a separate sort within the constraint system. Physical dimensions are solved by Gaussian elimination over Z; memory dimensions are solved by equality unification over a finite domain. Both are decidable and both participate in the same inference pass. This is the bridge to DMM. Memory placement is a dimensional constraint solved by the same machinery that solves physical unit constraints. The unification of these two constraint domains within a single inference framework is the formal basis for the design-time tooling described in Section 4. 

2.6 Representation Selection as a Dimensional Function 

The persistence of dimensional annotations through compilation creates a capability that early-erasure systems cannot provide: the compiler can select numeric representations based on the dimensional domain of the values being computed. IEEE 754 distributes precision uniformly across its representable range. A float64 allocates the same number of mantissa bits to values near 1.0 as to values near 10 300 . For computations whose values span a narrow dimensional range (gravitational forces between 10 −11 and 10 30 

6newtons, membrane potentials between −80 and +40 millivolts, sensor readings between 0 and 100 celsius), the majority of IEEE 754’s precision budget is allocated to ranges that the computation will never visit. Gustafson’s posit arithmetic [ 7, 6] makes a different allocation. Posits use tapered precision : a variable-length regime field concentrates mantissa bits near 1.0 and reduces precision at extremes. The Posit Standard (2022) [ 19 ] standardized the exponent size ( es = 2 ) across all bit widths, enabling trivial conversion between precisions by appending or rounding bits. Recent work on bounded posits (b-posits) [ 9 ] constrains the regime field to a fixed maximum size ( rs ≤ 6), which bounds the regime to between 2 and 6 bits. This constraint enables decoder implementation via simple multiplexers, achieving 79% less power, 71% smaller area, and 60% reduced latency compared to standard posit decoders, while matching or exceeding IEEE-compliant float32 hardware performance. A further consequence of the bounded regime is hardware reuse across precisions: with rs = 6 , the maximum non-fraction field width is 1 + rs + es bits, which is identical for 16-bit, 32-bit, and 64-bit operands. IEEE 754 cannot share decode hardware across precisions because the exponent field width and bias change with format. The b-posit design eliminates this obstacle. DTS provides the formal mechanism for what posit arithmetic presupposes: knowledge of which value ranges matter for a given computation. The dimensional annotation on a value constrains its semantic range. The compiler can evaluate how different representations distribute precision across that range and select the one that minimizes worst-case relative error. Formally, given a value v with dimension d and a value range [a, b ] (inferred from dimensional constraints, domain annotations, or platform binding specifications), and a set of available representations R = {r1, . . . , r k} on target T , the compiler selects: 

r∗ = arg min  

> r∈R

max 

> x∈[a,b ]

|x − round r(x)||x| (3) For IEEE 754, the worst-case relative error is approximately 2−p (where p is the mantissa width) uniformly across the representable range. For posits with es = 2 , the worst-case relative error is minimal near 1.0 and increases toward the regime extremes. The dimensional range [a, b ]

determines which distribution is preferable. Representation selection is a deterministic function from dimensional constraints and target capabilities. The function is computable at compile time; its inputs are properties of the PSG (dimensional annotations and platform bindings), and its output is a code generation decision that the language server can surface at design time: 

> force: float<newtons> Dimensional range: [1e-11, 1e30] (from gravitational constant and stellar masses) +-- x86_64: float64 (worst-case relative error: 1.11e-16, uniform) +-- xilinx: posit<32, es=2> (worst-case relative error: 2.3e-8 at range extremes, | 1.5e-9 near 1.0) +-- Note: posit provides 10x better precision in [0.01, 100] subrange where 94% of computed forces reside

The design environment shows which representation was selected and why : the dimensional range, the precision distribution of each candidate representation, and the overlap between the precision “sweet spot” and the actual value distribution. This capability is bidirectional. If the engineer specifies a posit representation explicitly (because the computation benefits from tapered precision), the dimensional constraints can verify that the posit’s dynamic range encompasses the expected value range. For posit32 with es = 2 ,the representable range is approximately [10 −36 , 10 36 ]. If the dimensional range exceeds this, the compiler emits a diagnostic: 

> Warning: posit<32, es=2> dynamic range [1e-36, 1e36] does not cover full dimensional range [1e-11, 1e72] of astronomicalDistance<meters> Consider: float64 (covers full range) or scaling to AU (fits posit range)

7The suggestion to scale to astronomical units is itself a dimensional operation: the compiler knows that 1 AU ≈ 1.5 × 10 11 meters, and that re-dimensioning the computation in AU brings the value range closer to posit32’s representable bounds. This guidance is possible only because the dimension survives to the point where representation selection occurs. 

# 3 Deterministic Memory Management as Coeffect Discipline 

3.1 Coeffects and Contextual Properties 

Effects describe what a computation does to its environment (mutation, I/O, exceptions). Coeffects describe what a computation requires from its environment (capabilities, resources, contextual assumptions) [ 18 ]. Memory allocation strategy is a coeffect: a function that allocates from an arena requires that an arena exists in its calling context; a function that places values on the stack requires that the stack frame outlives those values. In the Clef/Fidelity framework, coeffects are tracked in the PSG as annotations on computa-tion nodes. The coeffect system handles three categories: 

Allocation coeffects. Where does a value’s storage come from? Stack frame, arena, reference-counted heap, static memory, hardware-specific region (FPGA BRAM, neuromorphic neuron state memory). 

Lifetime coeffects. How long does a value persist? Lexical scope (stack), arena scope (freed when arena is released), ownership-based (freed when last reference drops), static (program lifetime). 

Capability coeffects. What does the computation require from its context? Mutable access, target-specific hardware features, dimensional consistency of inputs. 

3.2 Escape Analysis as Coeffect Propagation 

Classical escape analysis determines whether a value outlives its creating scope. In most compilers, this is a binary classification (escapes or does not) used to decide between stack and heap allocation. The analysis runs during optimization, is opaque to the software engineer, and produces no design-time feedback. Ownership-based systems such as Rust [ 10 ] brought lifetime verification to the surface as a compile-time discipline, requiring the engineer to annotate lifetimes at function boundaries; the compiler then accepts or rejects the program based on those annotations. The coeffect model described here pursues the same goal of static lifetime verification, with a different annotation strategy and a different response to violations. In the coeffect model, escape analysis is a propagation of lifetime constraints through the PSG. When a value is created, it receives a tentative lifetime coefficient (typically the lexical scope of its binding). When the value is used, the usage imposes a lifetime requirement (the value must live at least as long as the usage site’s scope). If the usage’s required lifetime exceeds the value’s tentative lifetime, the value’s lifetime is promoted. The promotion is recorded in the PSG as a coeffect annotation, a visible, navigable property of the graph. The language server can report: “this value was created with stack-eligible lifetime but promoted to arena allocation because it escapes via the return path at line 42.” The formal rule: If λrequired (v, use i) > λ tentative (v) for any use i, then λ(v) := max 

> i
> (

λrequired (v, use i)) (4) where λ denotes the lifetime ordering: stack < arena < heap < static. 83.2.1 Escape Classification 

The binary escapes/does-not-escape model discards information. A value that escapes via closure capture has different allocation requirements than one that escapes via return value or byref parameter. The coeffect system classifies escape behavior into a discriminated union that preserves this information: 

EscapeKind( v) ∈ { StackScoped , ClosureCapture (t), ReturnEscape , ByRefEscape } (5) where t identifies the closure node that captures v. Each classification maps to a specific allocation strategy and lifetime bound: Table 2: Escape classification and allocation strategy mapping.                  

> Escape Classification Allocation Strategy Lifetime Bound Diagnostic
> StackScoped Stack ( memref.alloca )Lexical scope None (optimal) ClosureCapture (t)Arena (closure env.) Lifetime of closure t“Captured by closure at line n”ReturnEscape Arena (caller’s scope) Caller’s scope “Escapes via return path” ByRefEscape Arena (param. origin) Origin scope of ref. “Escapes via byref parameter”

The classification is computed during PSG elaboration, before the traversal that generates MLIR. This ordering is critical: the PSG’s zipper-based traversal witnesses escape annotations that were resolved during elaboration; it does not compute them during emission. The traversal is purely navigational; all allocation decisions are properties of the graph, not decisions made during code generation. 1

The classification interacts with the lifetime ordering. A ClosureCapture (t) escape imposes the constraint λ(v) ≥ λ(t): the captured value must live at least as long as the closure that captures it. If the closure itself escapes (is returned, stored in a data structure, passed to another function), the constraint propagates transitively. The PSG records the full escape chain, enabling the language server to display the transitive reason for a promotion: “this value was promoted to arena because it is captured by a closure that is returned from the enclosing function.” 

3.2.2 Compositional Allocation Resolution 

The escape classification determines allocation strategy, but the resolution must compose across function boundaries without requiring source-level duplication. A function that operates on a 

Span<float> should work identically whether the span is stack-allocated, arena-allocated, or backed by a hardware memory region. The compositional principle: allocation strategy is resolved at the point of use by detecting the type’s memory representation and composing the appropriate access operations. When the compiler encounters a mutable variable reference where a value is expected, it composes a load operation transparently: 

resolve( v) = 

{v if τ (v) is a value type 

load( v) if τ (v) = MemRef( τ ′) (6) This is the lvalue/rvalue distinction expressed as a type-driven transformation. The resolution is computed from the type, not from parameter threading, preserving the monadic composition of       

> 1This separation has a practical consequence for the inline keyword. When a function allocates on the stack and returns a pointer, the pointer becomes invalid when the function returns. Marking the function inline causes the compiler to expand the function body at the call site, lifting the allocation to the caller’s frame. This is escape analysis by annotation: the inline keyword asserts that the function should not create a distinct stack frame, and the compiler verifies that the inlined allocation does not escape the caller. The coeffect system records this as a mandatory inline constraint, distinct from performance-motivated inlining, which the compiler defers to the MLIR optimization pipeline where full program context is available.

9the compilation pipeline. Each compilation phase remains a pure transformation from annotated graph to annotated graph; no phase carries hidden state about which values have been loaded and which have not. 

3.3 The Push, Bounded, and Poll Models of Coeffect Specification 

Developers interact with the coeffect system through three models that form a spectrum analogous to type annotation in ML-family languages. The parallel is direct: type inference transformed programming from ceremony to expression by letting the compiler determine what it could from context. Lifetime inference follows the same principle. 

Push model (explicit declaration). The engineer annotates a function with explicit coeffect constraints:  

> let processReadings [<Target: x86_64 | xilinx>] [<Memory: arena>] (sensors: Span< float <celsius>>) : ProcessedData =
> // ...

The compiler propagates these constraints forward through the function body. Every value in the body inherits the target and memory constraints from the declaration. Inference resolves the remaining details (specific register allocation, BRAM placement on FPGA, cache line alignment) within the declared constraints. The PSG reaches saturation quickly because the engineer has provided sufficient boundary conditions for the inference to converge without ambiguity. 

Bounded model (scoped inference). The engineer provides scope boundaries; the compiler infers within those bounds:    

> let processReadings () = arena {
> let ! readings = readSensors ()
> let summary = summarize readings
> return (readings, summary) }

The computation expression marks the lifetime boundary. The let! syntax signals allocation from the arena. The compiler handles parameter threading, reference passing, and cleanup. The source specifies where inference should operate (within the arena scope); the compiler determines 

how values are allocated and when they are released. This is analogous to annotating function signatures while leaving local bindings inferred, a common pattern in ML-family languages. 

Poll model (full inference). The engineer writes without coeffect annotations:  

> let processReadings sensors =
> // ...

The compiler infers coeffects from usage context. If the function is called from three sites with different target configurations, the inference engine unifies across all call sites, propagating constraints backward to determine the function’s coeffect requirements. The function eventually reaches the same saturated state, but the path is longer and the result may be context-dependent: the function may resolve differently depending on which call site is considered. The three models correspond to a spectrum of inference scope: No model is incorrect. The push model produces PSG nodes that saturate faster, remain stable under dependency changes, and display unambiguous resolution in the design-time tooling. 10 Table 3: Push, Bounded, and Poll models of coeffect specification.                  

> Model Type analogy Developer provides Compiler infers PSG saturation
> Push let x: int = 5 Full coeffect constraints Internal details Immediate Bounded let f (x: int) = ... Scope boundaries Allocation within scope Fast Poll let x = 5 Nothing All coeffects from con-text Context-dependent

The bounded model offers a middle ground with modest annotation cost and fast convergence. The poll model imposes no annotation burden but produces nodes whose saturation depends on external context. The design-time tooling exploits these differences to provide “pit of success” guidance. When a function’s coeffect resolution varies across call sites, the language server displays the variation and suggests either a bounded scope (computation expression) or an explicit annotation. The engineer is not compelled to annotate; the tooling shows the consequences of not annotating. It rewards more explicit models with cleaner, more stable resolution display, creating a natural gradient toward explicit coeffect specification for functions where it matters. 

3.4 Escape-Driven Restructuring Guidance 

The most concrete instance of design-time coeffect guidance is escape-driven memory promotion. When the compiler determines that a stack-eligible value must be promoted to arena allocation due to an escape path, the language server can analyze the escape path and propose structural alternatives: 

Caller-provided buffer. The escape occurs because the function allocates internally and returns the result. If the caller provides the destination buffer, the value never escapes the callee’s frame. The function signature changes from producing a value to filling a caller-owned buffer. 

Continuation-passing style. If the caller needs only transient access to the value, the function can accept a continuation that consumes the value within the callee’s frame. The value never escapes; stack allocation is preserved. 

Explicit promotion. If the intended design calls for the value to outlive the callee’s frame (because it will be shared across subsystems or stored in a long-lived data structure), the allocation strategy is annotated explicitly. The promotion still occurs, but it is declared intent, verified by the compiler. Each alternative is a concrete refactoring with quantifiable consequences: the caller-provided buffer eliminates allocation entirely; the continuation preserves stack locality (and by extension, cache residency); the explicit annotation documents intent and stabilizes the PSG against future changes. In an ownership-based system, the same escape would produce a rejection; the engineer must diagnose the escape path and arrive at one of these restructurings independently. The coeffect model surfaces the diagnosis and the alternatives together. The restructuring guidance is generated from the same PSG that performs dimensional inference. The escape path is a chain of edges in the graph; the lifetime promotion is a coeffect annotation on those edges; the alternative restructurings are graph transformations that the compiler can preview before the engineer accepts them. There is no separate analysis tool; the compilation graph is the analysis tool. 11 3.5 The Quire as Coeffect Case Study 

The posit quire accumulator provides a concrete illustration of how DTS and DMM converge on a single construct. A quire is a fixed-width exact accumulator that holds intermediate results of multiply-add operations without rounding; rounding occurs once, when the final result is converted back to a posit value [ 7 ]. The Posit Standard (2022) [ 19 ] defines the quire width as 

n2/2 bits for an n-bit posit, yielding a 512-bit accumulator for posit32. This fixed relationship between posit precision and quire width simplifies both hardware implementation and compiler modeling. From the DTS perspective, the quire is a numeric container whose dimensional semantics are determined by the posit values it accumulates. A quire accumulating products of float<newtons> 

and float<meters> carries dimension newtons · meters = joules. The dimensional algebra tracks through the fused multiply-add operations:            

> let work (forces: Span< float <newtons>>) (distances: Span< float <meters>>) :float <joules> =
> let mutable q = Quire.zero
> for iin 0 .. forces.Length - 1 do
> q←Quire.fma q forces.[i] distances.[i] // dimension: newtons * meters = joules
> Quire.toPosit q // single rounding, dimension preserved

The source code carries no dimensional annotations beyond the parameter types. DTS infers that q carries dimension joules and that the final conversion preserves this dimension. The quire’s internal representation is invisible to the dimensional algebra; what matters is that the dimension flows through the accumulation chain and is verified at the output. From the DMM perspective, the quire is a memory resource with specific coeffect requirements: 

Allocation coeffect. For posit32, the 512-bit quire occupies 64 bytes, exactly one cache line on a typical architecture. On a CPU target, this is stack-eligible for short-lived accumulations and arena-eligible for long-lived ones. On an FPGA target, the quire is a 512-bit value in the posit arithmetic pipeline, mapped to fabric resources by synthesis. On a neuromorphic target, the quire may be unavailable entirely (the target lacks the accumulator width), triggering a capability coeffect failure. 

Lifetime coeffect. The quire must persist across the entire accumulation loop. Its lifetime is bounded by the loop scope in the common case. If the quire escapes (returned from a function, stored in a data structure for incremental accumulation across function calls), the same escape analysis from Section 3.2 applies: the compiler detects the promotion and surfaces it at design time. 

Capability coeffect. Not all targets support exact accumulation. The coeffect system records this as a capability requirement: Table 4: Quire support across target architectures.             

> Target Quire support Coeffect resolution
> x86_64 Software emulation (64 B on stack) Allocation: stack; ∼50 cycles/FMA Xilinx FPGA 512-bit fabric pipeline Allocation: fabric; 1 cycle/FMA RISC-V + Xposit Hardware quire instruction Allocation: arch. register; 1 cycle/FMA Neuromorphic (Loihi 2) Not available Capability failure

The convergence is in the PSG. The quire node carries dimensional annotations (from DTS), allocation and lifetime annotations (from DMM), and capability annotations (from the coeffect 12 system). All three are properties of the same graph node, resolved by the same inference pipeline, visible through the same language server interface. The design-time view: 

> q: Quire (exact accumulator) Dimension: joules (inferred from fma operands) +-- x86_64: stack, 64 bytes, 1 cache line, ~50 cycles/fma +-- xilinx: 512-bit fabric pipeline, 1 cycle/fma +-- loihi2: not available (no exact accumulation support) Lifetime: loop scope (lines 3-5), no escape detected

The quire is a value with dimensional, allocation, and capability properties that the existing DTS+DMM framework handles through its standard inference and coeffect machinery. Its size is deterministic for a given posit precision ( n2/2 bits per the Posit Standard [ 19 ]), making memory analysis straightforward: once the target’s posit width is known, the quire’s cache footprint and allocation strategy follow directly. 

# 4 The Program Semantic Graph as Design-Time Resource 

4.1 Elaboration, Saturation, and Latent Preservation 

The PSG progresses through two computational phases: 

Elaboration. Raw parsed syntax is enriched with type and dimensional information through inference. Each node acquires type annotations, dimensional constraints, and coeffect require-ments. Elaboration is the expensive phase; it involves constraint generation, unification, and resolution across the full dependency graph. 

Saturation. The elaborated graph is iteratively refined until all inference variables are resolved and all coeffect constraints are propagated to fixpoint. A saturated node has a complete, stable set of annotations: its type, dimension, memory placement, lifetime, and target-specific resolution are all determined. Concretely, the coeffects computed during elaboration and saturation include: Table 5: Coeffect categories computed during PSG elaboration and saturation.               

> Coeffect Category What It Resolves When Consumed
> Emission strategy Inline, separate function, or module init? MLIR generation Capture analysis Outer-scope variables a lambda requires Closure layout, escape classification Lifetime requirements Minimum lifetime for a value Allocation strategy selection SSA pre-assignment SSA identifier for the node’s result MLIR emission Dimensional resolution Physical dimension of a value Representation selection, transfer fidelity Target reachability Configured targets where node is reachable Code generation filtering

These coeffects are all computed before the graph traversal that generates target code. The traversal is purely navigational: it visits nodes in dependency order, observes the pre-computed coeffects, and emits the corresponding target representation. This “passive traversal” model, inspired by Petricek’s coeffect formalization [ 18 ] and Huet’s zipper for immutable graph navigation, ensures that the same coeffect annotations consumed by code generation are available to the language server for design-time display. There is no separate analysis; the compilation graph is the analysis. Because the PSG persists as a long-lived structure in the language server, the current design leans toward latent preservation: when a subgraph becomes inactive (a feature flag is disabled, a target is dropped), its saturated annotations are retained rather than discarded, allowing reactivation without full re-elaboration. 13 4.2 Three-State Node Model 

The PSG maintains three states for each node: Table 6: Three-state node model for PSG nodes.                      

> State Elaborated Saturated Active Optimizer Language Server
> Live Yes Yes Yes Yes Full resolution display Latent Yes Yes No No Dimmed, preserved reso-lution Fresh No No No No Syntax only, no resolu-tion

A live node participates in compilation and design-time display. A latent node is excluded from compilation but retains its annotations for inspection and rapid reactivation. A fresh node has been parsed but never elaborated; it appears in the design-time display as syntax without type or dimensional resolution. The distinction between latent and fresh is operationally significant. Reactivating a latent node is O(boundary ); the elaboration and saturation work has already been done. Activating a fresh node is O(subgraph ); the full inference pipeline must run. The design-time tooling reflects this difference: latent nodes display their resolved types (which are likely still correct), while fresh nodes display only their syntactic structure with a prompt to build. 

4.3 Soft Delete and Reachability 

The latent preservation model implies a soft-delete semantics for reachability analysis. When the compiler determines that a node is unreachable under the current configuration (feature set, target set, dependency set), it marks the node as latent. The node’s edges are annotated with a reachability bitvector: one bit per configured target, indicating on which targets the edge is active. This per-target reachability is essential for multi-target compilation. A function may be reachable on x86 and FPGA but unreachable on a neuromorphic target (because the target lacks floating-point computation paths). The reachability status of the function is not a single boolean; it is a bitvector that the language server can display as a per-target compatibility matrix. The optimizer and code generator consume only the active subgraph; they filter on the reachability bitvector during graph traversal. The language server consumes the full graph; it displays latent nodes with their preserved resolution, enabling inspection of code paths that are not currently compiled but could be activated by changing the configuration. 

4.4 Design-Time Feedback as Compilation Byproduct 

The PSG-as-design-resource model produces several categories of design-time feedback that are byproducts of the compilation process, not separate analyses: 

Dimensional resolution display. Every numeric value carries its resolved dimension in the PSG. The language server renders this as inline annotations, hover tooltips, and a persistent resolution panel showing the current function’s dimensional resolution across all configured targets. 

Memory placement display. Every value carries its resolved allocation strategy and lifetime in the PSG. The language server renders this alongside dimensional information, showing where each value lives in the target’s memory topology. 14 Escape analysis diagnostics. When the coeffect system promotes a value’s allocation strategy (stack to arena, arena to heap), the promotion is recorded in the PSG as a coeffect annotation. The language server renders this as a diagnostic with the escape path, the promotion reason, and restructuring alternatives. 

Cache locality estimates. For values in hot loops (detected via loop nesting analysis, also a PSG annotation), the language server can estimate cache residency based on the value’s size, alignment, and allocation strategy. A stack-allocated 800-byte span occupies 12.5 L1 cache lines and is guaranteed contiguous; an arena-allocated span of the same size may or may not be contiguous depending on arena state. The estimated performance difference can be quantified and displayed. 

Cross-target transfer analysis. When a value crosses a hardware boundary (FPGA to CPU, CPU to NPU), the compiler resolves the transfer protocol, latency, bandwidth, and precision fidelity of any numeric conversion. This information is a PSG annotation on the transfer edge. The language server renders it as a diagnostic on the value’s usage at the boundary, making visible exactly what happens when a computation result moves between targets. For hardware/software co-design workflows, the engineer sees the cost of a target boundary before committing to an architecture partition. None of these feedback categories require a separate analysis pass. They are all properties of the PSG that the compiler computes as part of normal compilation. The language server reads the PSG; the design-time tooling is a view over the compilation graph. 

# 5 Related Work 

5.1 Units of Measure in F# 

Kennedy’s Units of Measure system for F# [ 13 ] established the core inference algorithm for dimensional types in an ML-family language. The system is elegant, fully inferrable, and integrated with Hindley–Milner unification. Its limitation, by design, is early erasure: units are checked at compile time and discarded during IL generation, before the compilation stages where they could inform representation selection or memory placement. DTS extends Kennedy’s algebraic framework with dimensional persistence through compilation, multi-target resolution, and integration with the coeffect system for memory dimensions. 

5.2 Dependent Types in F*, Idris, and Agda 

F* [ 26 ] is an ML-family language with dependent types and effect tracking, drawing from F#, OCaml, and Standard ML, and using an SMT solver (Z3) for automated proof discharge. Two aspects of F*’s design were particularly influential for DTS. First, F*’s treatment of representation as a concern separable from type identity informed the core DTS principle that a float<newtons> carries its dimensional semantics independently of whether the underlying representation is a 64-bit IEEE 754 float, a 32-bit posit, or a 16-bit fixed-point value. In F*, refinement types can constrain values without altering their runtime representation; DTS applies an analogous separation at the level of physical dimensions and numeric format. Second, F*’s integration of SMT-LIB2 [ 2] via Z3 demonstrated that solver-backed constraint resolution could be embedded transparently within an ML-family type checking workflow, a pattern that informs how the Fidelity framework resolves dimensional, memory, and target constraints during PSG elaboration. Idris [ 4] provides dependent types with a focus on practical programming. Agda [ 17 ] is a proof assistant that doubles as a programming language. All three systems can encode dimensional 15 constraints, but the encoding uses the full power of dependent types, sacrificing decidability and complete inference. DTS achieves the same dimensional correctness guarantees with a restricted algebraic framework that preserves these properties. 

5.3 Rust Ownership and Borrow Checking 

Rust’s ownership system [ 10 ] provides deterministic memory management through a discipline of ownership, borrowing, and lifetime annotation. The borrow checker is a static analysis that rejects programs where lifetimes are inconsistent. Rust’s approach front-loads the annotation burden: the engineer specifies lifetimes in function signatures, and the compiler verifies them. The Clef/Fidelity approach differs in three respects. First, the analysis operates at a different depth in the compilation pipeline. Our understanding of ownership-based borrow checking is that it analyzes a mid-level intermediate representation derived from the surface syntax. The Clef coeffect analysis operates on the Program Semantic Graph after type checking, SRTP resolution, and dimensional inference have completed; the escape classifier therefore has access to semantic information that is not syntactically visible at the function signature level. This depth of context enables escape classifications (Section 3.2.1) that account for dimensional constraints, resolved type parameters, and closure capture structure jointly. Second, lifetimes are inferred by default (the poll model of Section 3.3), with explicit annotation available when the engineer needs control (the push model) or when inference produces surprising results. This parallels the difference between mandatory lifetime annotations and ML-family type inference: both achieve static guarantees, but the annotation burden falls differently. Table 7: Comparison of Rust and Clef memory management approaches.               

> Property Rust Clef
> Lifetime specification Mandatory at function boundaries Inferred; three levels of explicitness Allocation strategy Ownership-determined Coeffect-determined Design-time feedback Accept/reject with error diagnostics Escape diagnostics with restructuring al-ternatives Annotation cost Every function with references Only where inference is insufficient Analysis depth Mid-level IR from surface syntax PSG after type checking, SRTP, and di-mensional inference Multi-target implications Single compilation target Strategy may vary per target

Third, the design-time tooling provides graduated feedback. When the coeffect system promotes a value’s allocation, the language server displays the escape path and proposes concrete restructuring alternatives (Section 3.4). In an accept/reject model, the engineer diagnoses the escape path and restructures the code independently; the Clef model invests the compiler’s escape analysis as a design-time resource, surfacing the reasons for the allocation decision alongside actionable alternatives. The static guarantee is preserved in both cases; the difference lies in the feedback granularity during development. A further distinction emerges in multi-target compilation. When a single codebase targets multiple backends with different memory hierarchies, a fixed ownership model applies the same allocation strategy everywhere. The coeffect model allows the same function’s allocation decisions to vary by target: a value that is stack-allocated on a general-purpose CPU might be placed in a scratchpad region on an embedded MCU, or mapped to a different memory tier on an accelerator. The escape classification is target-invariant; the allocation response to that classification is target-specific. This separation is consistent with the representation selection model of Section 2.6, where the dimensional annotation constrains the value semantics and the target determines the concrete representation. 16 5.4 Koka Effects and Coeffects 

Our review of Koka [ 16 ] showed that its effect tracking in the type system allows the compiler to specialize effect handling (e.g., eliminating heap allocation for effects that can be handled on the stack). The coeffect model in Clef extends this to memory placement: allocation strategy is a coeffect that flows through the semantic graph and is resolved at each call site. The integration with dimensional types is novel: a value’s physical dimension and its memory placement are jointly tracked in the same graph, enabling diagnostics that relate dimensional correctness to memory behavior. 

5.5 Posit Arithmetic and Domain-Aware Representation 

Gustafson’s posit arithmetic [ 7 ] addresses the numeric representation problem from the hardware and arithmetic side: tapered precision allocates more mantissa bits to value ranges near 1.0, where most computations concentrate, and fewer bits to extreme ranges. The Posit Standard (2022) [ 19 ] unified the exponent size ( es = 2 ) across all precisions and formalized the quire accumulator at n2/2 bits for n-bit posits, providing exact accumulation for dot products and fused multiply-add sequences. Gustafson’s comprehensive treatment [ 6 ] extends this foundation with parameterizable formats, including bounded posits (b-posits) where the regime field is constrained to a maximum size rs , and asymmetric configurations where the precision profile can differ for magnitudes above and below 1. Jonnalagadda, Thotli, and Gustafson [ 9] provide the first hardware efficiency analysis of bounded posits, demonstrating that the bounded regime constraint eliminates the variable-length field decoding overhead that has historically been the primary objection to posit hardware. The b-posit decoder matches IEEE float hardware in area and latency while preserving posit’s superior accuracy properties. This result is directly relevant to DTS: the representation selection function of Section 2.6 can now include b-posit configurations in its candidate set with confidence that the hardware cost is competitive with IEEE 754. Posit arithmetic implicitly assumes that the compiler or engineer knows which value ranges matter for a given computation. DTS makes this knowledge explicit and formal: the dimensional annotation constrains the value range, and the representation selection function (Section 2.6) could use this constraint to choose among a variety of representations, including IEEE 754, posit, b-posit, or fixed-point formats. The two systems are complementary: posit provides the representation with domain-matched precision distribution; DTS provides the formal mechanism for determining which domain applies. The quire accumulator illustrates this complementarity at the DMM level. The quire is a memory resource whose allocation, lifetime, and target availability are coeffect properties (Section 3.5). Without the coeffect framework, quire management is ad hoc; with it, the compiler can verify that quire lifetime is correct, that the target supports exact accumulation, and that the allocation strategy matches the accumulation pattern. The deterministic quire size ( n2/2

bits for a given posit precision) makes this analysis straightforward. 

5.6 MLIR and Multi-Level Compilation 

MLIR [ 15 ] provides the infrastructure for multi-stage compilation with extensible dialects and attributes. The DTS preservation model relies on MLIR’s attribute system to carry dimensional metadata through dialect lowering. The contribution is not to MLIR itself but to the demonstration that dimensional type metadata can be preserved through the full MLIR compilation pipeline without loss, using standard MLIR extension mechanisms. 17 5.7 Rank Polymorphism and Shape-Indexed Types 

Slepak, Shivers, and Manolios develop Remora [ 25 ], a rank-polymorphic array language whose type system tracks array shape as a sequence of natural-number indices. The system uses restricted dependent types to verify that rank-polymorphic lifting produces shape-consistent results, with decidable type checking and a proof of type soundness. Slepak et al. formalize rank-polymorphic type inference as constraint satisfaction over string equations [ 24 ]; DTS inference operates over integer linear constraints in abelian groups (Section 2.2). The dimensional indices in Remora are elements of the free monoid over N (array shapes); the dimensional indices in DTS are elements of Zk (physical quantities). Both systems demonstrate that encoding dimensional information at the type level enables verification that conventional type systems cannot express. The architectural difference is that Remora’s shape indices require dependent types with existential quantification for dynamic shapes, while DTS dimensional indices are fully inferrable within extended Hindley–Milner unification. This distinction reflects the underlying algebraic complexity: shape concatenation in the free monoid admits less structure for inference than integer linear constraints in an abelian group. 

# 6 Future Work 

6.1 Formal Decidability Proof 

The decidability claim for DTS inference rests on the reduction to linear algebra over Z. A formal proof of decidability, including the interaction between physical dimensions and memory dimensions (which use different algebraic structures within the same constraint system), would strengthen the theoretical foundation. 

6.2 Unified Shape and Quantity Indices 

The orthogonality of array-shape indices (as in rank-polymorphic systems such as Remora [ 25 ]) and physical-quantity dimensions (as in DTS) suggests that both can coexist as independent axes in a unified type-level index structure. A matrix of forces has both a shape (e.g., 3 × 4, from the domain of rank polymorphism) and a physical dimension ( newtons , from the domain of DTS). Neither system alone captures both. A system combining shape-indexed rank polymorphism with physical dimensional inference would verify both geometric compatibility and quantity consistency, properties that are currently checked by separate systems or not checked at all. The algebraic structures involved, the free monoid over N for shapes and Zk for quantities, are independent and compose as a direct product. Whether inference over this product structure preserves the decidability and principal-type properties of either component is an open question. 

6.3 Quantified Design-Time Feedback 

The cache locality estimates and performance projections described in Section 4.4 are currently heuristic. Integration with hardware performance models (cache hierarchy simulators, memory bandwidth models, PCIe latency tables) would produce quantified estimates with confidence intervals, further grounding the restructuring guidance in measurable costs. 

6.4 Incremental Adoption Through Porting 

A practical adoption path for Clef would be the incremental porting of existing codebases. Code arriving from Rust carries lifetime annotations but no dimensional discipline; the porting process would preserve the lifetime structure while the PSG infers dimensional constraints over the existing control flow. Code from TypeScript or Go carries neither dimensional annotations nor explicit lifetime management; porting from these languages would be a deeper refinement, where 18 the design-time tooling would surface both dimensional and lifetime information that the PSG infers from an initial unadorned translation. Python and C would represent a similar starting point, with the additional challenge of weak or absent static typing at the source. In each case, the porting process would be a multi-pass refinement: an initial translation would produce valid Clef source with minimal annotations, and the design-time tooling would guide the engineer toward progressively stronger constraints. Each pass through the feedback loop would add annotations that the compiler can verify, tightening the program’s static guarantees incrementally. The goal would be a “pit of success” model where the tooling makes the well-typed, lifetime-correct version of the code easier to reach than the under-specified version. For engineers accustomed to garbage-collected or dynamically typed environments, this graduated path could reduce the friction of adopting a statically typed, low-level compilation target. The design of this refinement workflow, including how the language server would prioritize suggestions and how partial annotation would interact with inference, warrants dedicated study. 

6.5 Posit Hardware Co-Design and Dimensional Range Analysis 

The representation selection function in Section 2.6 is currently a compile-time decision. For reconfigurable targets (FPGAs), the compiler could go further: given the dimensional ranges of all values in a computation, the compiler could determine whether a non-standard b-posit configuration [ 9] (e.g., 20-bit with es = 2 and rs = 5 , or an asymmetric configuration with different precision profiles for magnitudes above and below 1 [ 6 ]) would provide better precision-per-bit than any standard configuration. The bounded regime field makes this search tractable: 

rs values between 2 and 6 combined with es values between 1 and 5 produce a small, enumerable parameter space. This would require extending the CIRCT compilation path to parameterize the posit arithmetic pipeline based on dimensional analysis results, a form of type-directed hardware synthesis. 

6.6 Dataflow Architectures and Control-Flow/Data-Flow Partitioning 

The DTS+DMM model as presented in this paper assumes a control-flow execution model, but the PSG’s structure may also be relevant to the growing class of dataflow and spatial architectures. Coarse-Grained Reconfigurable Arrays (CGRAs), spatial dataflow accelerators, and other non-Von Neumann compute fabrics are proliferating as alternatives to GPU-centric approaches for HPC and AI inference workloads. These architectures execute computation graphs spatially across arrays of processing elements with explicit data movement between them. The PSG’s coeffect annotations, which already describe data dependencies, escape behavior, and memory placement, carry information that could inform the partitioning of a computation graph across spatial hardware. A longer-term question is whether the DTS+DMM framework could eventually support inference about which sections of a codebase would benefit from control-flow execution and which would be better suited to dataflow mapping. The PSG’s saturation phase computes dependency structure, memory access patterns, and dimensional constraints for every subgraph; this information could, in principle, inform a partitioning heuristic that routes compute-bound, regular subgraphs toward spatial targets and irregular, branch-heavy subgraphs toward Von Neumann cores. This is a substantial open problem that the current paper does not address, but the PSG’s structure appears to provide a natural starting point for investigating it. The PSG’s binary edge structure is sufficient for the claims presented here, but certain compilation decisions for spatial dataflow targets would expose its limits. As a concrete example, AMD’s XDNA 2 NPU arranges AI Engine tiles in a two-dimensional grid with explicit, programmer-managed data movement via DMA and configurable interconnect [ 21 ]. Mapping operations to this architecture requires co-locating sets of operations on tiles, configuring sets of data routes between tiles, and partitioning sets of columns into spatial workload contexts. These 19 are constraints over sets of nodes, and their natural formalism is the hyperedge. A heterogeneous workstation combining a Von Neumann host, a spatial dataflow accelerator, and a reconfigurable fabric would present multiple targeting strategies with distinct transfer boundaries and memory hierarchies. The coeffect interactions at these boundaries, where dimensional constraints, escape analysis, capability requirements, and transfer fidelity converge on a single partitioning decision, are already implicitly multi-way in the current PSG; a Program Hypergraph (PHG) generalization would make them first-class. We defer this generalization to a subsequent paper, noting that hypergraph partitioning for spatial mapping is an established problem in VLSI placement [ 12 ]and that MLIR’s AIE dialect [ 1 ] provides infrastructure for spatial dataflow targeting within the existing Fidelity compilation pipeline. 

6.7 Delimited Continuations and Interaction Nets 

A separate line of investigation concerns the PSG’s potential role as a transparent compute graph that mediates between control-flow and data-flow execution models at a finer granularity than target-level partitioning. Clef adopts computation expressions from the F# tradition, and under analysis these decompose into two fundamental patterns: delimited continuations (DCont) for sequential, effectful computations, and interaction nets (Inet) for pure, parallelizable computations. If the PSG’s coeffect annotations could classify subgraphs along this axis, the compiler would have a basis for routing effectful regions toward stack-based continuation implementations and pure regions toward parallel execution, whether on SIMD units, GPU warps, or spatial dataflow tiles. Both sides of this duality are now represented in the MLIR ecosystem. Kang et al. [ 11 ]at Carnegie Mellon University introduce a DCont dialect for MLIR that models delimited continuations as first-class operations, targeting WebAssembly’s emerging stack switching primitives. Coll [ 5] at the University of Buenos Aires introduces an Inet dialect that implements the three Symmetric Interaction Combinators (Erase, Construct, Duplicate) from Lafont’s interaction net formalism [ 14 ] as MLIR operations with declarative rewrite rules. Together, these two dialects demonstrate that both continuation-based sequential control flow and interaction-net-based parallel graph reduction can be represented and lowered within the same MLIR infrastructure that the Fidelity compilation pipeline uses for code generation. The implications for DTS+DMM are speculative but worth noting. A PSG that carries both dimensional/coeffect annotations and DCont/Inet classification would be a compilation artifact that simultaneously describes what a computation means (dimensions, types), how it manages resources (escape analysis, allocation), and whether its execution is inherently sequential or parallelizable. This would extend the design-time feedback model: the language server could surface not only escape diagnostics and allocation strategies but also the continuation structure of effectful code and the parallelism opportunities in pure regions. We consider this a promising direction for future work. 

6.8 Formal Verification Integration 

Verification is a central commitment of the Fidelity framework, driven by the goal of producing systems suitable for high-reliability domains: real-time control, embedded systems, safety-critical infrastructure. The PSG’s dimensional and coeffect annotations provide the foundation for a dual-phase verification model that the framework implements across the design-time and compile-time boundaries. The first phase operates at design time. Because the DTS constraints reduce to quantifier-free linear integer arithmetic (QF_LIA), the dimensional proof obligations that the PSG generates are decidable and solvable in bounded time by SMT solvers such as Z3. The language server derives these obligations automatically from PSG structure during elaboration, verifying dimensional consistency and memory safety properties without requiring developer annotations. The bounded 20 decidability of QF_LIA is essential: it means the verification feedback meets real-time response requirements for interactive design-time tooling, providing continuous proof status as the engineer works. The second phase operates at compile time, using MLIR’s SMT dialect to embed verification conditions directly in the intermediate representation. As mlir-opt transformations execute, the embedded SMT assertions validate that each lowering pass preserves the semantic properties established during design-time verification. This creates translation validation across the full compilation pipeline: the proofs generated at the PSG level are carried through each transformation and re-verified after lowering, providing end-to-end assurance that the properties the engineer observes at design time are preserved in the emitted code. The two phases reinforce each other: design-time verification establishes the properties, and compile-time verification confirms their preservation. To our knowledge, this combination of SMT-backed design-time proof generation with MLIR-level translation validation has not been assembled in existing compilation frameworks. The bounded decidability of the underlying constraint theories (QF_LIA for dimensional algebra, coeffect lattices for memory safety) is what makes the dual-phase model tractable, and is the basis for our confidence in this architectural direction. 

6.9 Information Accrual and Deferred Optimization 

The PSG’s persistence as a design-time resource raises a question about when optimization decisions should be made. Let Ik represent the information available at compilation stage k.The stages common to all targets (source parsing, PSG elaboration, MLIR emission, MLIR optimization) form a shared prefix; the backend-specific stages diverge at the fan-out point: 

Isource ⊂ IPSG ⊂ IMLIR ⊂ IMLIR-opt ⊂ Ibackend ⊂ Inative (7) At the source level, the compiler knows types and dimensions. At the PSG level, it additionally knows coeffects, escape classifications, and saturated annotations. At the MLIR level, it knows the full program structure in SSA form. At the MLIR optimization level, it knows call frequencies and loop nesting. Beyond this point, the information set is backend-specific: the LLVM path adds target-specific parameters for CPU, GPU, MCU, or WebAssembly (cache line sizes, pipeline depths, SIMD widths, memory constraints); the CIRCT path adds FPGA resource budgets, timing constraints, and routing topology; other backends contribute their own target-specific context. The quality of optimization decisions Q improves with available information: 

Q(Ik) < Q (Ik+1 ) for all k (8) This formalizes an architectural principle: decisions that can be deferred to later compilation stages should be, because later stages have strictly more information. DTS annotations exemplify this. Dimensional information preserved through early stages enables representation selection at the MLIR level, where the target architecture is known. Had the dimensions been discarded at the source level (the early-erasure model of F#’s Units of Measure), the representation selection decision would be impossible at the point where it can be made optimally. The principle extends to memory management. Escape classification (Section 3.2.1) is computed during PSG elaboration because it requires type and scope information. Allocation strategy is resolved during MLIR emission because it requires target memory topology. Cache alignment, register allocation, and hardware resource mapping are determined during backend-specific lowering because they require target-specific parameters (microarchitectural details for CPU targets via LLVM, resource budgets and timing for FPGA targets via CIRCT). Each decision is made at the stage where its inputs are first available, which is the stage where the decision can be made with maximum context. 21 6.10 Implications for Numerically Disciplined Machine Learning 

The formal properties of DTS have implications for machine learning that the present paper identifies but does not fully develop. We note four specific connections that warrant independent investigation. 

Dimensional algebra under differentiation. The dimensional algebra is closed under differentiation. If f : R⟨d1⟩ → R⟨d2⟩, where ⟨d⟩ denotes the dimensional annotation, then: 

∂f ∂x : R⟨d2·d−11 ⟩ (9) The gradient of a loss function with dimension ⟨loss ⟩ with respect to a parameter with dimension ⟨d⟩ carries dimension ⟨loss · d−1⟩. This property follows from the abelian group structure: differentiation is division in the dimensional algebra, and division is closed in Zn. The inference algorithm of Section 2.2 extends to auto-differentiation graphs without modification: each gradient node inherits a dimension from the chain rule, and dimensional consistency of the full gradient computation is verified by the same Gaussian elimination that verifies the forward pass. The practical consequence: in a physics-informed model where the loss function includes terms with physical units (force residuals in newtons, energy conservation violations in joules), DTS can verify that gradient accumulation respects dimensional consistency. A gradient with dimension 

⟨newtons /meters ⟩ cannot be accumulated with a gradient of dimension ⟨joules /seconds ⟩ without a dimensional error. This verification is decidable, requires no annotation beyond the physical dimensions already present in the forward computation, and has zero runtime cost. 

Forward-mode differentiation as a coeffect property. Baydin, Pearlmutter, Syme, Wood, and Torr [ 3] demonstrated that the forward gradient, an unbiased estimate of the gradient computed via forward-mode automatic differentiation, can replace backpropagation entirely. The forward gradient is evaluated in a single forward pass, eliminating the backward pass and the activation tape it requires. This has a specific coeffect signature within the DMM framework. Reverse-mode AD (backpropagation) requires storing intermediate activations for the backward pass, imposing an 

O(L) auxiliary memory requirement where L is the number of layers. This is a coeffect: the backward pass requires the activation tape as a contextual resource. Table 8 summarizes the coeffect signatures of the two modes. Table 8: Coeffect signatures of reverse-mode and forward-mode automatic differentiation.             

> AD Mode Auxiliary Memory Gradient Activation Tape
> Reverse-mode O(L·B)Exact (full Jacobian ⊤)Required; spans backward pass Forward-mode [3] O(1) per layer Unbiased estimate Not required

The forward-mode coeffect signature (no activation tape, O(1) auxiliary memory per layer) means the escape analysis of Section 3.2 is trivially satisfied: no intermediate values escape their layer’s scope, and the entire gradient computation is stack-eligible. The coeffect system can verify this property at compile time: given a computation graph annotated with AD mode, the lifetime analysis confirms that forward-mode imposes no lifetime obligations beyond the current layer’s scope. The quire accumulator (Section 3.5) compounds this advantage. Forward-mode computes a directional derivative ∇vf (θ) = ⟨∇ f (θ), v ⟩ for a random perturbation vector v. The inner product is an accumulation of products, exactly the operation the quire makes exact. The coeffect system tracks the quire’s lifetime through the forward pass identically to how it tracks 22 quire lifetime in any accumulation loop: allocation at loop entry, accumulation within the loop body, conversion at loop exit. The convergence of these three properties (DTS verifying dimensional consistency of the gradient graph, forward-mode eliminating the activation tape coeffect, and the quire providing exact accumulation) produces a system where gradient computation is dimensionally verified, memory-minimal, and numerically exact. Each property is independently established; their composition within the PSG is the novel contribution. 

Representation selection for neural network value distributions. Neural network activations and gradients have well-characterized value distributions, typically concentrated near zero with heavy tails. The representation selection function of Section 2.6 applies: given the dimensional range of activations in a specific layer (inferrable from training statistics or dimensional constraints on the input domain), the compiler can select posit widths that concentrate precision where the values cluster. The quire (Section 3.5) provides exact gradient accumulation, eliminating the rounding errors that compound across millions of parameters during training. This connection between DTS (which provides the dimensional range) and posit arithmetic (which provides domain-matched precision) is an instance of the representation selection framework applied to a specific computational domain. The bounded posit (b-posit) format [ 9] extends this connection. ML workloads operate over a narrower dynamic range than general scientific computing, typically [10 −14 , 10 1], which permits smaller exponent and regime field sizes than the es = 2 , rs = 6 configuration suited to HPC. Gustafson [ 6] describes asymmetric b-posit configurations where the precision profile differs for magnitudes below and above 1: a steeper taper on the left half of the posit ring (magnitudes < 1,where most activations reside) paired with a flatter, higher-accuracy profile on the right half. An exponent bias shift from 20 to 2−2 or 2−3 centers the high-precision region on the activation distribution’s mode. Research at the National University of Singapore has demonstrated that such configurations maintain classification accuracy down to 5-bit representations, with a sharp accuracy degradation threshold at 4 bits. We see DTS as a formal mechanism that could make these configurations selectable at compile time. The dimensional range annotation on a neural network layer’s activations constrains the value distribution; the representation selection function evaluates candidate b-posit parameterizations ( es , rs , exponent bias) against that distribution. The b-posit’s bounded regime field ensures that the hardware cost of the selected configuration is predictable, and the format’s cross-precision hardware reuse property (Section 2.6) means a single decode unit can serve 8-bit, 16-bit, and 32-bit b-posit operations in a mixed-precision training pipeline. 

Physics-informed loss term verification. Physics-informed neural networks [ 20 ] encode physical laws as differentiable loss terms. A loss term that penalizes violations of Newton’s second law would compute F − ma and minimize the squared residual. DTS can verify that F , m, and 

a carry dimensions ⟨newtons ⟩, ⟨kg ⟩, and ⟨m · s−2⟩ respectively, and that the subtraction F − ma 

is dimensionally consistent. This verification is a compile-time check on the loss function’s structure, not a runtime constraint on the trained model’s outputs. It ensures that the physics constraints imposed during training are dimensionally well-formed, a property that existing ML frameworks cannot verify because dimensional information is never encoded. 

# 7 Conclusion 

Dimensional Type Systems are not a restricted form of dependent types. They are a distinct formal category with distinct algebraic structure (finitely generated abelian groups), distinct computational properties (decidable, fully inferrable, principal types), and distinct practical 23 applications (preservation through multi-stage compilation, multi-target resolution, domain-aware representation selection, integration with memory management coeffects). The integration of DTS with Deterministic Memory Management through a shared coeffect discipline in the Program Semantic Graph produces a unified framework for design-time semantic analysis. The compiler’s internal representation becomes the engineer’s design tool. Escape classification, allocation promotion, cache locality estimation, representation fidelity diagnostics, and cross-target transfer analysis are all views over the same graph that enforces dimensional consistency. The escape classification taxonomy (Section 3.2.1) demonstrates that escape analysis need not be binary: distinguishing closure capture from return escape from byref escape enables targeted allocation strategies and precise engineering diagnostics. The convergence of DTS with posit arithmetic demonstrates that the framework’s implications extend beyond type theory. Gustafson’s posit representation [ 7 , 6 ] presupposes that the compiler knows which value ranges matter; DTS provides the formal mechanism for that knowledge. The bounded posit format [ 9] resolves the hardware efficiency concern that has historically limited posit adoption, making posit configurations viable candidates in the representation selection function. The quire accumulator presupposes that memory management is deterministic and verifiable; DMM as a coeffect discipline provides that guarantee. Neither system was designed with the other in mind, yet they compose naturally within the PSG because both formalize properties of numeric computation that existing type systems leave implicit. The information accrual principle (Section 6) formalizes why preservation matters: each compilation stage has strictly more information than its predecessor, and decisions made at later stages are strictly better informed. Dimensional annotations preserved through early stages enable representation selection, escape-aware allocation, and cross-target transfer analysis at the stages where those decisions can be made optimally. Early erasure forecloses these possibilities; dimensional persistence enables them. The practical consequence is that the compiler’s internal analysis (escape classification, allocation strategy, representation fidelity, cache residency) is available as design-time feedback without a separate tooling layer. The PSG serves both roles because the information required for compilation and the information useful for software design are the same information. This paper has presented three claims. First, that dimensional annotations persisting through compilation enable the compiler to jointly resolve representation selection and deterministic memory management, and that this coupling is the reason DTS and DMM belong in a single framework (Sections 1–4). Second, that the inference machinery derives composition-dependent properties, including dimensional range, escape classification, and representation compatibility, that emerge from constraint interaction across the program graph and cannot be replaced by per-value annotation regardless of provenance (Sections 2–3). Third, that the unified graph enables design-time analysis, including representation fidelity diagnostics and cross-target transfer analysis, that early-erasure systems cannot provide (Sections 4–6). The posit quire case study (Section 3.5) and the forward-mode auto-differentiation analysis (Section 6.10) illustrate specific applications; the formal properties on which they depend are established in the referenced literature [7, 19, 6, 9, 3]. 

# Acknowledgments 

This paper owes a particular debt to John L. Gustafson, whose detailed correspondence on posit arithmetic, bounded posit parameterization, and domain-specific precision tuning shaped how the author thinks about representation selection. The treatment of asymmetric b-posit configurations and hardware reuse in Sections 2.6 and 6.10 reflects his influence directly. Don Syme’s F# and its Units of Measure system are the type-theoretic substrate from which DTS draws its inference architecture. His feedback on this manuscript sharpened the framing of dimensional persistence and the relationship between annotation provenance and 24 compilation-stage decisions. Paul Snively provided early guidance on verification reference materials that opened a line of investigation the author would not have pursued otherwise; the formal verification aspects of the Fidelity framework research bear his mark. Martin Coll’s work on the Inet dialect for MLIR and his ongoing engagement with the Fidelity project have been a consistent source of both technical insight and encouragement. 

# Software Availability 

The Clef language, Composer compiler, and supporting libraries described in this paper are developed under the Fidelity Framework project. Source repositories are available at https: //github.com/FidelityFramework . The language specification, design rationale, and compiler documentation are published at https://clef-lang.com . Central components of the framework are dual-licensed; terms are detailed in each repository. All components referenced in this paper, including the DTS inference engine, escape analysis pipeline, and BAREWire interchange protocol, are under active development. 

# References 

[1] AMD/Xilinx. MLIR-AIE: An MLIR-based toolchain for AMD AI engines, 2024. github.com/Xilinx/mlir-aie. [2] Clark Barrett, Aaron Stump, and Cesare Tinelli. The SMT-LIB standard: Version 2.0. In 

Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) ,2010. [3] Atilim Günes Baydin, Barak A. Pearlmutter, Don Syme, Frank Wood, and Philip Torr. Gradients without backpropagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08587 , 2022. [4] Edwin Brady. Idris, a general-purpose dependently typed programming language: Design and implementation. Journal of Functional Programming , 23(5), 2013. [5] Martin Coll. Inet dialect: Declarative rewrite rules for interaction nets. MLIR Open Design Meeting, 2025. April 10, 2025. University of Buenos Aires. [6] John L. Gustafson. Every Bit Counts: Posit Computing . Chapman & Hall/CRC Computa-tional Science. CRC Press, 2024. [7] John L. Gustafson and Isaac T. Yonemoto. Beating floating point at its own game: Posit arithmetic. Supercomputing Frontiers and Innovations , 4(2), 2017. [8] Houston Haynes. The program hypergraph: Multi-way relational structure for geometric algebra, spatial compute, and physics-aware compilation, 2026. Companion paper. SpeakEZ Technologies. [9] Aditya Anirudh Jonnalagadda, Rishi Thotli, and John L. Gustafson. Closing the gap between float and posit hardware efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.01615 , 2025. [10] Ralf Jung, Jacques-Henri Jourdan, Robbert Krebbers, and Derek Dreyer. RustBelt: Securing the foundations of the Rust programming language. In Proceedings of the 45th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL) , 2018. [11] Byeongjee Kang, Harsh Desai, Limin Jia, and Brandon Lucia. WAMI: Compilation to WebAssembly through MLIR without losing abstraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16048 ,2025. 25 [12] George Karypis and Vipin Kumar. Multilevel k-way hypergraph partitioning. VLSI Design ,11(3):285–300, 2000. [13] Andrew Kennedy. Types for units-of-measure: Theory and practice. In Central European Functional Programming School , volume 6299 of LNCS . Springer, 2009. [14] Yves Lafont. Interaction nets. Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL) , pages 95–108, 1990. [15] Chris Lattner, Mehdi Amini, Uday Bondhugula, Albert Cohen, Andy Davis, Jacques Pienaar, River Riddle, Tatiana Shpeisman, Nicolas Vasilache, and Oleksandr Zinenko. MLIR: Scaling compiler infrastructure for domain specific computation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO) , 2021. [16] Daan Leijen. Koka: Programming with row polymorphic effect types. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Mathematically Structured Functional Programming (MSFP) , 2014. [17] Ulf Norell. Towards a practical programming language based on dependent type theory . PhD thesis, Chalmers University of Technology, 2007. [18] Tomas Petricek, Dominic Orchard, and Alan Mycroft. Coeffects: A calculus of context-dependent computation. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP) , 2014. [19] Posit Working Group. Standard for posit arithmetic (2022), 2022. posithub.org. [20] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 378:686–707, 2019. [21] Alejandro Rico, Saurabh Pareek, Javier Cabezas, David Clarke, et al. AMD XDNA NPU in Ryzen AI processors. IEEE Micro , 44(6):73–83, 2024. [22] Dipanwita Sarkar, Oscar Waddell, and R. Kent Dybvig. A nanopass infrastructure for compiler education. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP ’04) , pages 201–212. ACM, 2004. [23] Matthias Schabel and Steven Watanabe. Boost.units: Zero-overhead dimensional analysis and unit/quantity manipulation and conversion, 2008. Boost C++ Libraries. [24] Justin Slepak, Panagiotis Manolios, and Olin Shivers. Rank polymorphism viewed as a constraint problem. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Libraries, Languages and Compilers for Array Programming (ARRAY@PLDI) , 2018. [25] Justin Slepak, Olin Shivers, and Panagiotis Manolios. An array-oriented language with static rank polymorphism. In Proceedings of the 23rd European Symposium on Programming (ESOP) , volume 8410 of LNCS , pages 27–46. Springer, 2014. [26] Nikhil Swamy, Cătălin Hriţcu, Chantal Keller, Aseem Rastogi, Antoine Delignat-Lavaud, Si-mon Forest, Karthikeyan Bhargavan, Cédric Fournet, Pierre-Yves Strub, Markulf Kohlweiss, Jean-Karim Zinzindohoué, and Santiago Zanella-Béguelin. Dependent types and multi-monadic effects in F*. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL) , 2016. 26 A DTS Inference Example 

Consider the following unannotated Clef function:   

> let computeForce mass1 mass2 distance =
> let g = 6.674e-11 g * mass1 * mass2 / (distance * distance)

The DTS inference proceeds as follows: 1. g is assigned dimension variable ’d_g .2. mass1 is assigned ’d_m1 , mass2 is assigned ’d_m2 .3. distance is assigned ’d_dist .4. g * mass1 generates constraint: d(result 1) = ’d_g + ’d_m1. 5. result_1 * mass2 generates constraint: d(result 2) = ’d_g + ’d_m1 + ’d_m2. 6. distance * distance generates constraint: d(denom ) = 2 · ’d_dist. 7. result_2 / denom generates constraint: d(return ) = ’d_g + ’d_m1 + ’d_m2 − 2 · ’d_dist. At this point, the function is dimensionally polymorphic: it accepts any combination of dimen-sions that satisfies the algebraic constraints. If the function is called with mass1 : float<kg> ,

mass2 : float<kg> , distance : float<m> , unification resolves: 

• ’d_m1 = kg, ’d_m2 = kg, ’d_dist = m

• ’d_g = m3 · kg −1 · s−2 (inferred from the known value of the gravitational constant, or from the return type if annotated as float<newtons> )

• Return dimension: m 3 · kg −1 · s−2 + kg + kg − 2 · m = kg · m · s−2 = newtons ✓

The inference is complete without any dimensional annotations in the source code. 

# B Escape Analysis and Restructuring Example 

Consider:       

> let processReadings (sensors: Span< float <celsius>>) =
> let readings = sensors ▷Span.map ( fun s→s * calibrationFactor)
> let summary = summarize readings (readings, summary)

The coeffect analysis determines: 1. readings is created from a Span.map operation. Tentative lifetime: lexical scope of processReadings .2. readings is used in summarize readings . Required lifetime: lexical scope of processReadings .No promotion needed for this usage. 3. readings appears in the return tuple (readings, summary) . Required lifetime: caller’s scope. This exceeds the tentative lifetime. 4. Promotion: readings lifetime is promoted from stack (lexical scope) to arena (caller’s scope). The language server surfaces the promotion and proposes three alternatives: 27 Alternative 1: Caller-provided buffer. 

let processReadings (sensors: Span< float <celsius>>) (output: Span< float <celsius>>) = sensors ▷ Span.mapInto output ( fun s →s * calibrationFactor) summarize output 

Coeffect: no escape, stack-eligible. Allocation cost: zero (caller owns the buffer). 

Alternative 2: Continuation style. 

let processReadings (sensors: Span< float <celsius>>) (k: Span< float <celsius>> →Summary →’a) = 

let readings = sensors ▷Span.map ( fun s →s * calibrationFactor) k readings (summarize readings) 

Coeffect: no escape, stack-eligible. Allocation cost: zero (continuation runs within frame). 

Alternative 3: Explicit annotation. 

let processReadings [<Memory: arena>] (sensors: Span< float <celsius>>) = 

let readings = sensors ▷Span.map ( fun s →s * calibrationFactor) 

let summary = summarize readings (readings, summary) 

Coeffect: declared arena allocation. Allocation cost: arena allocation (amortized). PSG annotation: confirmed intent, stable under dependency changes. 

# C Representation Selection with Posit Arithmetic 

Consider a gravitational force computation compiled for two targets: x86_64 (CPU) and a Xilinx FPGA with a posit arithmetic pipeline. 

let computeForce (m1: float <kg>) (m2: float <kg>) (r: float <m>) : float <newtons> = 

let g = 6.674e-11<m^3 * kg^-1 * s^-2> g * m1 * m2 / (r * r) 

The DTS inference resolves the return dimension as newtons ( kg · m · s−2). The compiler’s representation selection proceeds per target: 

x86_64 target. The platform binding specifies IEEE 754 float64 as the default numeric representation. The dimensional range of the gravitational constant ( 6.674 × 10 −11 ) combined with plausible mass and distance ranges (planetary: 10 22 to 10 30 kg, 10 6 to 10 11 m) produces force values spanning roughly 10 −2 to 10 25 newtons. IEEE 754 float64 covers this range with uniform relative error of ≈ 1.11 × 10 −16 , well within engineering precision. Selection: float64 .

Xilinx FPGA target. The platform binding specifies posit32 (es = 2 ) as the preferred representation. The dynamic range of posit32 extends to approximately 10 ±36 . The dimensional range [10 −2, 10 25 ] newtons falls well within this bound. Posit32 with es = 2 provides approxi-mately 2−27 relative error near 1.0, degrading to 2−8 at the regime extremes. For forces near 

10 0 newtons (the most common case in n-body simulation), posit32 provides better precision than float32 and comparable precision to float64. 28 The compiler selects posit32 for the FPGA target and emits the force computation into the posit arithmetic pipeline: regime extraction, fraction multiplication in DSP48 slices, accumulation in the quire. The quire persists for exactly the duration of the accumulation loop, a 512-bit value in the FPGA fabric. The language server displays the cross-target resolution:            

> computeForce: float<kg> →float<kg> →float<m> →float<newtons> +-- x86_64: float64 →float64 →float64 →float64 | Precision: 1.11e-16 relative error (uniform) | Quire: not used (no accumulation loop detected) +-- xilinx: posit32 →posit32 →posit32 →posit32 | Precision: ~1.5e-9 in [0.01, 100], ~3.9e-3 at regime extremes | Quire: available, 512-bit fabric pipeline | Dynamic range: [1e-36, 1e36] covers [1e-2, 1e25] +-- Transfer (xilinx →x86_64): posit32 →float64 Protocol: BAREWire over PCIe Fidelity: 1.0 (lossless; float64 range exceeds posit32 range)

The cross-target transfer fidelity of 1.0 (lossless) is a consequence of the dimensional analysis: every posit32 value within its representable range is exactly representable in float64, which covers 10 ±308 . The compiler proves this at compile time from the representation specifications. A transfer in the opposite direction (float64 → posit32) would show fidelity < 1.0 with a precision loss estimate derived from the dimensional range. This example illustrates the full DTS+DMM pipeline for posit arithmetic: dimensional inference determines the value range, representation selection chooses the numeric format per target, the quire’s allocation and lifetime are resolved as coeffects, and the language server presents the complete picture as an interactive design-time diagnostic. 29