Title: NativeTernary: A Self-Delimiting Binary Encoding with Unary Run-Length Hierarchy Markers for Ternary Neural Network Weights, Structured Data, and General Computing Infrastructure

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03336v2

Published Time: Thu, 09 Apr 2026 00:27:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# NativeTernary: A Self-Delimiting Binary Encoding with Unary Run-Length Hierarchy Markers for Ternary Neural Network Weights, Structured Data, and General Computing Infrastructure 

Maharshi Savdhariya 11Indian Institute of Technology Bombay · IIM Udaipur, 

maharshisavdhariya@gmail.com 

Provisional Patent Filed · Indian Patent Office · 2026 

Abstract 

We present NativeTernary , a binary encoding scheme that partitions the 2-bit pair space into three data symbols representing ternary values — either balanced {− 1, 0, +1 } or unsigned 

{0, 1, 2} — and a reserved structural delimiter. BitNet b1.58 (Ma et al., 2024) demonstrates that large language models can operate entirely on ternary weights {− 1, 0, +1 }, yet no native binary wire format exists for such models. NativeTernary closes this gap. The central contribution is the use of unary run-length encoding to represent semantic hierarchy depth: a sequence of N consecutive delimiter pairs denotes a boundary of level N , encoding character, word, sentence, paragraph, and topic boundaries at cost 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 bits respectively — proportional to boundary rarity. The choice of which 2-bit pair serves as the delimiter is a design parameter: {11 } is the primary embodiment, offering simple OR-gate detection; 

{00 } is an alternative embodiment optimised for ultra-low-power CMOS systems, minimising switching activity. All four bit-pair choices are covered by the patent claims. We present three encoding variants: (1) the primary scheme with {11 } as sole delimiter; (2) a dual-starter variant where both {10 } and {11 } initiate distinct symbol namespaces; and (3) an analysis of unsigned versus balanced ternary data mappings. We describe a path toward ternary-native general computing infrastructure requiring no hardware changes, and outline applications spanning ternary neural network weight storage, hierarchical natural language encoding, edge computing, IoT and satellite telemetry, industrial sensors, automotive systems, medical devices, gaming, and financial tick data. The decoder is a 10-line stateless state machine resilient to bitstream corruption. Benchmarked against GGUF on the real BitNet b1.58 2B4T architecture (2B parameters, 24 layers, ∼170 tensors): NativeTernary encodes all structural boundaries in 91 bytes versus ∼42 KB of GGUF tensor headers — a 460 × reduction in boundary overhead . Per-weight storage is 2.000 bits versus 2.625 bits for GGUF Q2 K (1.31 × smaller) and 8.000 bits for GGUF int8 (4.0 × smaller). Encode throughput: 47–69 MB/s. Decode throughput: 35–45 MB/s on commodity hardware. The C reference implementation is available at https://github.com/sm45118/nativeternary .

Keywords: ternary encoding, self-delimiting codes, binary framing, ternary neural networks, BitNet b1.58, 1-bit LLMs, ternary weights, GGUF, weight serialization, hierarchical structure, IoT compression, run-length encoding, embedded systems, low-power encoding, CMOS power optimization. 1 

> arXiv:2604.03336v2 [cs.LG] 8 Apr 2026 NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026

1. Introduction 

The question that led to this work began with human speech. When we speak, we do not transmit an unbroken stream of sound — we pause. A short pause marks the end of a word. A longer pause marks a sentence. An even longer pause signals a topic shift. These pauses carry structural information separate from the words themselves, and listeners process them instinctively. Structure arrives with the signal, not as an afterthought. Computers do not work this way. Binary communication systems represent every symbol as a fixed-width sequence of bits — typically 8 — regardless of where it falls in a semantic hierarchy. Structure is layered on top as headers, delimiters, and metadata — always as overhead, never as signal. The author’s first instinct was a hardware solution: what if a clock signal could carry three states rather than two, encoding a structural pause directly in the physics of transmission? A 1.5-cycle pulse could mark a word boundary; a 2-cycle pulse a sentence. This idea founders on practical grounds — the global binary infrastructure cannot be replaced, and multi-level clock timing is fragile under real-channel jitter. What remained was a software question: can the existing binary infrastructure be made to carry ternary structure without any hardware changes? The first concrete attempt was a compression experiment. Consider two standard 8-bit bytes:   

> 00010101 00000110 (raw binary, 16 bits) -> strip leading zeros, represent residual in ternary -> 20101 210 (ternary digit sequence) -> re-encode ternary digits as binary -> result: modest compression, insufficient gain

The approach — suppress predictable leading zeros, represent the meaningful residual in base-3, re-encode — was directionally correct. The compression was real but the ternary-to-binary conversion overhead negated most of the gain. The next step was a 2-bit pair representation. If the 4 possible 2-bit patterns {00 , 01 , 10 , 11 }

were partitioned into data-carriers and delimiters, structure could be encoded inline. The first variant used both {10 } and {11 } as symbol starters — two distinct delimiter namespaces — with {00 } and {01 } carrying binary data. The deeper insight came when the author recalled that the Soviet Setun computer (1958) demonstrated ternary computing, and that subsequent information-theoretic analysis confirmed ternary’s optimality: log 2(3) ≈ 1.585 bits per trit — the closest integer base to the mathematical optimum of e. A 2-bit pair can represent exactly three data states. That fourth state — one of the four bit-pair choices — becomes the pause. The delimiter. The scheme encodes ternary data and structural boundaries simultaneously, in the same stream, with no additional overhead. The hierarchy extension followed naturally. One delimiter pair marks a word boundary. Two consecutive delimiter pairs mark a sentence. Three mark a paragraph. The count of consecutive delimiter pairs is the level — no secondary encoding required. Rarer boundaries receive longer delimiters, echoing Huffman coding applied to structure rather than symbols. The practical urgency became clear when the author encountered Microsoft’s BitNet b1.58 [1] — a ternary large language model in which every weight is exactly {− 1, 0, +1 }. Despite operating natively in ternary, BitNet models are stored in binary container formats designed for floating-point data, with no native concept of a ternary value or a layer boundary. NativeTernary closes this representational gap directly. 2NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026 

2. Related Work 

Self-delimiting codes. Elias [ 2 ] introduced the first self-delimiting integer codes, using prefix patterns to encode length implicitly. UTF-8 [ 4 ] uses 10xxxxxx for continuation bytes and 

11xxxxxx for start bytes — structurally similar to our dual-starter variant, but encoding only character length, not multi-level semantic hierarchy. NativeTernary encodes hierarchy depth through run-length rather than prefix structure and is infinitely extensible without spec revision. 

Balanced ternary. The theoretical optimality of balanced ternary has been known since Knuth [ 3]. The Setun computer demonstrated practical ternary computation in 1958. NativeTernary achieves ternary data density on existing binary infrastructure with no hardware changes. 

Ternary neural networks. Ma et al. [ 1] demonstrate that BitNet b1.58 with weights in 

{− 1, 0, +1 } achieves competitive performance with full-precision transformers at scale. NativeT-ernary provides the first native wire format for such models. 

Hierarchical language models. Longformer [ 5], hierarchical transformers [ 6], and structured state space models impose hierarchy at the architecture level. NativeTernary encodes hierarchy at the token stream level — without architectural modification. 

3. The NativeTernary Encoding 

3.1 Primary scheme: single delimiter {11 }

The primary NativeTernary encoding partitions the 2-bit space exhaustively: Table 1: Primary scheme bit-pair assignments 

Bit-pair Role Balanced value Unsigned value 

00 Data symbol 0 −1 0

01 Data symbol 1 0 1

10 Data symbol 2 +1 2

11 Structural delimiter (reserved) (reserved) Hierarchy is encoded as unary run-length of {11 } pairs:           

> 11 -> level 1: character / subword boundary (2 bits) 1111 -> level 2: word boundary (4 bits) 111111 -> level 3: sentence boundary (6 bits) 11111111 -> level 4: paragraph / topic boundary (8 bits) 11...11 x N -> level N: N x 2 bits (infinitely extensible)

Key property: boundary cost grows linearly with semantic depth. For natural language and structured signal data, boundary frequency decreases exponentially with depth. Total delimiter overhead is therefore O(log N ) over a sequence of N tokens. 

Delimiter choice as a design parameter. The use of {11 } as the reserved bit-pair is a design choice, not a fundamental constraint. Any of the four 2-bit patterns — {00 }, {01 }, {10 },or {11 } — can serve as the structural delimiter, with the remaining three bit-pairs carrying the three data symbols. The choice of delimiter determines hardware detection cost, power consumption, and noise vulnerability. Section 3.6 analyses all four choices and presents the 

{00 }-as-delimiter variant as a distinct power-efficiency embodiment. All four choices are covered by the patent claims. 3NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026 

3.2 Dual-starter variant: two delimiter namespaces 

An earlier variant uses both {10 } and {11 } as symbol starters, with {00 } and {01 } as the only data-carrying pairs: Table 2: Dual-starter variant bit-pair roles 

Bit-pair Role 

00 Data bit 0 (continuation) 

01 Data bit 1 (continuation) 

10 Symbol start — type A namespace 

11 Symbol start — type B namespace Any decoder can re-synchronise by scanning for any bit-pair beginning with 1. Two independent alphabets or two interleaved data streams — command vs. data, channel A vs. channel B — coexist in a single bitstream with zero mux header. Data density is lower (0.5 bits/bit) but the dual-namespace property has applications in protocol framing and embedded communication. The dual-starter structure generalises: any two chosen bit-pairs can serve as namespace starters. Both variants are covered by the patent claims. 

3.3 Balanced vs. unsigned ternary — analysis 

The data symbols {00 , 01 , 10 } can be interpreted in two ways with meaningfully different properties: Table 3: Balanced vs. unsigned ternary tradeoffs 

Interpretation Values Best for Key advantage 

Balanced ternary {− 1, 0, +1 } Signed deltas, neural weights, DSP Native sign; safer on noisy channel Unsigned ternary {0, 1, 2} Counters, indices, DNA bases Simpler hardware arithmetic Unsigned ternary has one non-obvious vulnerability: the value 2 (encoded as {10 }) is a single bit-flip away from the delimiter {11 }. On noisy channels this creates an asymmetric error — a corrupted data symbol mimics a boundary marker, causing a false structural boundary rather than a wrong value. Balanced ternary does not share this vulnerability. For high-noise channels (satellite, LoRa, industrial RF) balanced ternary is recommended. For low-noise or wired channels (USB, PCIe, memory bus) unsigned ternary is acceptable and offers simpler arithmetic. The decoder is identical in both cases — the interpretation of {00 }/{01 }/{10 } is a semantic layer above the framing logic and declared in the stream header. 

3.4 Legacy binary transcoding 

For systems that wish to adopt NativeTernary framing without changing their source data format, a transcoding path exists: convert arbitrary binary data to base-3, then encode each trit as a 2-bit pair. The size impact is: 

n binary bits −→ n × log 2 32 ≈ n × 0.792 bits in data pairs Net effect: ≈26% expansion on purely random binary data. This is not a compression path — it is a migration path. Legacy binary data can be wrapped in NativeTernary framing, gaining self-synchronisation, hierarchy markers, and ternary-native structure at the cost of modest size 4NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026 

overhead. For data that is already ternary-native — neural network weights, signed sensor deltas, financial tick directions — the transcoding overhead is zero. 

3.5 Decoder 

Listing 1: NativeTernary decoder pseudocode (DELIMITER is a stream-header parameter)     

> while bits_remain(): pair = read_2_bits() if pair != DELIMITER: emit_data(pair) # 00 -> -1/0, 01 -> 0/1, 10 -> +1/2 else: level = 1 while peek_2_bits() == DELIMITER: consume_2_bits() level += 1 emit_boundary(level) # 1=char, 2=word, 3=sent, 4=para...

The decoder is parameterised by DELIMITER , declared once in the stream header. It is stateless, requires no lookup table, and resynchronises on any occurrence of the delimiter bit-pair — making it intrinsically resilient to bitstream corruption regardless of which bit-pair is chosen as the delimiter. 

3.6 Delimiter choice as a design parameter: the {00 } power-efficiency variant 

The four possible 2-bit patterns offer meaningfully different engineering tradeoffs when used as the structural delimiter: Table 4: Comparison of all four bit-pair delimiter choices 

Delimiter Detection hardware Power profile Recommended use 

{11 } (primary) OR gate on both bits High (both bits set) General purpose; easy hardware de 

{00 } NOR gate on both bits Minimal (zero switching) Ultra-low-power IoT, implantables, 

{01 } XNOR on bits Medium Reserved for future standardisation 

{10 } XNOR on bits Medium Reserved for future standardisation The {00 }-as-delimiter variant deserves particular attention. In CMOS logic, power consumption is dominated by switching activity — transitions between 0 and 1. A bit-pair of {00 } carries zero switching on both lines. When the delimiter pair is {00 }, every structural boundary is transmitted as two consecutive low bits, minimising dynamic power draw on the data lines. For ultra-low-power systems — implantable medical devices, sub-μA LoRa sensor nodes, battery-backed agricultural monitors, and deep-space probes where transmitter power budgets are measured in milliwatts — this distinction is commercially significant. In the {00 }-as-delimiter scheme, the three data symbols are {01 }, {10 }, and {11 }. The unsigned ternary vulnerability noted in Section 3.3 is inverted: the data symbol {01 } is now one bit-flip from the delimiter {00 }. As with the primary scheme, balanced ternary mapping eliminates this asymmetric vulnerability on noisy channels. The decoder pseudocode in Section 3.5 applies without modification to the {00 }-as-delimiter variant — only the DELIMITER constant changes. This makes the implementation cost of supporting both variants trivial: a single compile-time or stream-header flag. Both the {11 }-delimiter (primary) and {00 }-delimiter (power-efficiency) embodiments, as well as all other bit-pair choices, are covered by the patent claims. 5NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026 

4. Toward a Ternary-Native Computing Paradigm 

The implications of NativeTernary extend beyond encoding efficiency. Every computing system manages boundaries: instruction boundaries, process boundaries, file boundaries, memory page boundaries, network packet boundaries, interrupt signals. In every current system, these boundaries are encoded as separate metadata — inode tables, page tables, packet headers, interrupt vectors — layered on top of data streams rather than woven into them. NativeTernary offers a path where boundaries are intrinsic to the data itself. Critically, this path requires no hardware changes. It is a software and firmware encoding layer that runs entirely on existing binary infrastructure. The transition is incremental: application libraries first, OS drivers second, firmware in network and memory controllers third, optional silicon acceleration as a later optimisation. 

4.1 File system and operating system boundaries 

Current file systems maintain separate inode tables, FAT tables, and directory structures to track where files and folders begin and end. Under NativeTernary these map to hierarchy levels in the data stream:      

> 11 -> end of record / data unit 1111 -> end of file 111111 -> end of directory / folder 11111111 -> end of volume / partition 1111111111 -> end of device

A NativeTernary-aware file system driver could detect boundaries directly from the data stream, eliminating round-trips to metadata tables in hot paths. This is a driver-layer software change — no hardware modification required. 

4.2 Memory and cache hierarchy 

Modern CPU cache hierarchies (L1/L2/L3) manage boundaries between cache lines, pages, and NUMA domains via separate metadata structures. A ternary-aware memory controller could encode cache-line, page, and NUMA-domain boundaries as level-1, level-2, and level-3 NativeTernary delimiters in the memory bus protocol — a firmware-level change to the memory controller, not a silicon redesign. 

4.3 Network protocol framing 

Ethernet, TCP/IP, and HTTP use fixed-width length fields and separate delimiter bytes to mark packet and session boundaries. A NativeTernary framing layer at the application level embeds packet, segment, and session boundaries as run-length delimiter sequences — self-delimiting, self-synchronising, and parseable with a simpler state machine than any current protocol parser. 

4.4 Instruction stream boundaries 

A NativeTernary instruction encoding would embed instruction, basic-block, function, and module boundaries as hierarchy levels in the instruction stream itself — enabling branch prediction, prefetch, and JIT compilation to operate with explicit structural signals rather than inferring them from opcode patterns. 

4.5 The infrastructure transition path 

Stage 1. Application libraries: NativeTernary encoder/decoder in C, available as open source. Zero infrastructure changes. 

Stage 2. OS driver integration: file system drivers, network stack parsers, memory allocators 6NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026 

adopt NativeTernary framing for boundary detection. 

Stage 3. Firmware: network interface cards, memory controllers, storage controllers implement NativeTernary boundary detection in firmware. 

Stage 4. Silicon: optional hardware acceleration of the decoder state machine — a 2-bit register and level counter — as a minor addition to existing controllers. This contrasts with all prior ternary computing proposals — including Setun and subsequent academic designs — which required bespoke ternary logic gates and ternary memory cells. NativeTernary achieves ternary data density and structural expressiveness within the binary computation model. 

5. Applications 

5.1 Ternary neural network weight storage 

BitNet b1.58 and related ternary LLMs quantize every weight to {− 1, 0, +1 }. NativeTernary provides a native wire format: each weight maps to one 2-bit pair, with layer boundaries as {11 }

(2 bits), tensor boundaries as {1111 } (4 bits), and model section boundaries as {111111 } (6 bits). The decoder — a 2-bit register plus a level counter — is significantly simpler than GGUF or SafeTensors parsers currently used for ternary model distribution. 

5.2 Hierarchical natural language encoding 

Transformer attention mechanisms receive a flat token sequence with no explicit structural signal. Under NativeTernary, boundary level is directly available as a stream annotation. Attention span can be conditioned on boundary level — restricting cross-boundary attention at lower levels, permitting it at higher levels — without any parser or architectural modification. Local positional encodings can reset at each boundary, providing richer structural context than flat absolute position encoding. 

5.3 Edge computing and microcontrollers 

Microcontrollers (ARM Cortex-M, RISC-V, AVR, PIC) running embedded firmware manage instruction streams, sensor data, and inter-device communication within severe memory and bandwidth constraints. NativeTernary’s decoder — implementable in under 200 bytes of compiled C — is suitable for the smallest devices. 

5.4 IoT and industrial sensors 

Inter-sample deltas from temperature, pressure, vibration, and humidity sensors typically fall within {− 1, 0, +1 } when sampled at high frequency. NativeTernary encodes such streams natively. Industrial sensor networks (Modbus, PROFIBUS, OPC-UA) transmitting SCADA data over constrained links benefit from the self-synchronising property — frame recovery after packet loss without retransmission is intrinsic to the encoding. 

5.5 Automotive systems 

Modern vehicles carry 100+ sensors communicating over CAN bus, LIN bus, and emerging automotive Ethernet. Sensor packets are typically 8–64 bytes. NativeTernary encodes sensor delta streams natively, with sensor channel boundaries as level-1 delimiters and ECU domain boundaries as level-2 delimiters. V2X safety messages — small, latency-critical, error-prone — benefit from self-synchronisation. 

5.6 Medical implantables and wearables 

Continuous glucose monitors, implantable cardiac monitors, and neural interface devices transmit small packets continuously over BLE or proprietary RF links. Transmission energy is the primary 7NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026 

constraint. The {00 }-as-delimiter variant (Section 3.6) is particularly relevant here: minimising switching activity on the RF front-end extends implant lifetime between replacements or recharges. 

5.7 Satellite and space telemetry 

CubeSat and SmallSat downlink channels operate at 1–9 kbps with high bit error rates and no retransmission capability. The self-synchronising property — a decoder re-acquires frame alignment by scanning for any delimiter pair — provides intrinsic burst-error resilience. Hyper-spectral imaging satellites transmitting band-compressed sensor data benefit from the ternary delta encoding for inter-pixel residuals. 

5.8 Gaming network state compression 

Multiplayer game state updates — player position deltas, health deltas, event flags — are transmitted 20–128 times per second per player. Deltas between frames are small and signed, typically falling within {− 1, 0, +1 } for low-speed state. NativeTernary encodes game state delta streams natively, with object boundaries as level-1 delimiters and scene boundaries as level-2 delimiters. 

5.9 High-frequency trading tick data 

Price movements in financial market tick data are naturally ternary at short timescales: up (+1), unchanged (0), down ( −1). NativeTernary encodes tick direction streams natively, with instru-ment boundaries, session boundaries, and exchange boundaries as hierarchy levels. Microsecond-latency decode is a requirement met by the stateless decoder. 

6. Information-Theoretic Properties 

Data density. Three data symbols over a 2-bit alphabet yields log 2 32 ≈ 0.792 bits of information per bit spent on data — optimal for a ternary-native alphabet on a binary channel. 

Delimiter overhead amortisation. In English text with average word length 5 characters, sentence length 20 words, and paragraph length 8 sentences, delimiter overhead per character is approximately 0.44 bits — significantly less than fixed-width special token approaches such as 

[SEP] and [CLS] in BERT-family models, which spend 8–16 bits per boundary regardless of level. The dual-starter variant achieves 0.5 bits/bit data density — lower than the primary scheme but retaining dual-namespace and self-synchronisation properties. 

7. Benchmarks 8. Benchmarks 

We present two benchmark comparisons: (1) per-weight storage efficiency across model scales using synthetic weight arrays, and (2) boundary overhead using the real BitNet b1.58 2B4T architecture. The C reference implementation is available at https://github.com/sm45118/ nativeternary .

Per-weight storage: synthetic weight arrays 

We compare NativeTernary against three GGUF storage modes on synthetic uniform {− 1, 0, +1 }

arrays at 1M, 125M, and 1B weight scales. 8NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026 

Table 5: Bits per weight: NativeTernary vs. GGUF storage modes 

Format Bits/weight Per-tensor overhead Notes 

NativeTernary 2.000 2 bits per layer boundary Exact — zero waste GGUF Q2 K 2.625 ∼256 bytes per tensor Best current quantization GGUF Q4 0 4.500 ∼256 bytes per tensor Common default GGUF int8 8.000 ∼256 bytes per tensor Naive ternary storage Table 6: Encoded size across model scales (synthetic uniform distribution) 

Scale Weights NT Q2 K Q4 0 vs Q2 K vs int8 

Small 1M 250 KB 329 KB 563 KB 0.76 × 0.25 ×

Medium 125M 31.3 MB 41.1 MB 70.4 MB 0.76 × 0.25 ×

Large 1B 250 MB 329 MB 563 MB 0.76 × 0.25 ×

Boundary overhead: real BitNet b1.58 2B4T architecture 

The per-weight storage comparison understates NativeTernary’s advantage because it omits the dominant overhead in GGUF: per-tensor metadata headers. We compute boundary overhead using the real BitNet b1.58 2B4T architecture: a Llama-like transformer decoder with 2 billion parameters, 24 layers, 2,048 hidden dimensions, and intermediate size 5,632 [1]. 

Tensor count. Each transformer layer contains approximately 7 weight tensors (Q, K, V, O attention projections; gate, up, down FFN projections). Over 24 layers plus embedding and output head: 24 × 7 + 2 ≈ 170 tensors total. 

GGUF header overhead. Each GGUF tensor carries a metadata header encoding tensor name ( ∼20 bytes), shape ( ∼32 bytes), quantization parameters ( ∼200 bytes), and alignment padding — approximately 256 bytes per tensor minimum. For 170 tensors: 170 × 256 = 43 ,520 bytes ≈ 42 KB of pure structural overhead carrying zero weight data. 

NativeTernary boundary overhead. Layer boundaries are encoded as a single {11 } pair (2 bits). Tensor boundaries within layers are encoded as two consecutive {11 } pairs (4 bits). For 24 layer boundaries and 170 tensor boundaries: (24 × 2) + (170 × 4) = 48 + 680 = 728 bits = 91 bytes .NativeTernary encodes all structural boundaries for a 2B parameter model in 91 bytes — 460 ×

less than GGUF tensor headers. This advantage is architectural and scales with model depth: deeper models have more tensors, more GGUF headers, and the same 91-byte NativeTernary overhead. 

Benchmark assumptions and limitations 

Four assumptions underlie the synthetic benchmarks. First, GGUF Q2 K overhead is estimated at 2.625 bits per weight — actual overhead varies by tensor shape and model architecture. Second, GGUF tensor headers are estimated at 256 bytes per tensor — real headers vary by metadata content. Third, synthetic benchmarks use uniform {− 1, 0, +1 } distributions — trained BitNet weights are non-uniform (typically ∼50% zeros) which does not affect NativeTernary’s 2.000 bits/weight but may affect Q2 K block scaling. Fourth, throughput figures reflect single-core commodity hardware. Validation against released BitNet b1.58 2B4T model checkpoints is planned for a subsequent revision. 9NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026 

Table 7: Encode and decode throughput on commodity hardware 

Scale Weights Encode MB/s Decode MB/s 

Small 1M 46.8 35.3 Medium 125M 69.2 45.1 Large 1B 62.6 35.7 Table 8: Boundary overhead: NativeTernary vs. GGUF on BitNet b1.58 2B4T (2B params, 170 tensors) 

Format Weight data Boundary/header overhead Overhead ratio 

NativeTernary 500 MB 91 bytes < 0.0001% GGUF Q2 K 656 MB ∼42 KB 460 × larger than NT GGUF int8 2,000 MB ∼42 KB 460 × larger than NT 

9. Discussion and Limitations 

NativeTernary is not a general-purpose compression scheme for arbitrary binary data. For dense random data the 0.792 bits/bit data density is a strict overhead relative to raw binary. The scheme is optimal when: (a) data is naturally ternary or reducible to ternary deltas; (b) hierarchical structure is meaningful; and (c) self-synchronisation after corruption is valued. The unsigned ternary variant introduces an asymmetric noise vulnerability — the data symbol adjacent to the delimiter value is one bit-flip from a false boundary — that must be considered in high-noise channel design. The balanced ternary variant does not share this vulnerability. The 

{00 }-as-delimiter variant shifts which data symbol is most vulnerable; channel noise analysis should be performed for each deployment. Adoption in general computing infrastructure requires library and driver support before hardware benefit can be realised. The transition path is incremental and backward-compatible at each stage. 

10. Conclusion 

We have described NativeTernary, a family of binary encodings in which ternary data and multi-level semantic structure are carried in the same bitstream using the same 2-bit pairs. The central idea — unary run-length of a reserved delimiter pair encoding hierarchy depth — is simple, information-theoretically motivated, and produces a decoder of minimal complexity. The choice of delimiter bit-pair is a design parameter: {11 } is the primary embodiment; {00 }

provides a power-efficiency alternative for ultra-low-power CMOS systems; all four choices are claimed. We have presented two encoding variants, analysed balanced versus unsigned ternary tradeoffs, described a legacy binary transcoding path, and outlined a low-disruption incremental path from application libraries to ternary-native general computing infrastructure. The scheme is immediately applicable to ternary neural network weight storage, hierarchical NLP encoding, edge computing, IoT and industrial telemetry, automotive systems, medical devices, gaming, satellite communications, and financial data. We make the C implementation publicly available and invite experimental validation. 10 NativeTernary Savdhariya, 2026 

Acknowledgements 

The author thanks the open-source ArXiv community and the BitNet research team for making their work publicly available. 

References 

[1] Ma, S., Wang, H., Ma, L., et al. (2024). The era of 1-bit LLMs: All large language models are in 1.58 bits. arXiv:2402.17764 .[2] Elias, P. (1975). Universal codeword sets and representations of the integers. IEEE Transac-tions on Information Theory , 21(2), 194–203. [3] Knuth, D. E. (1969). The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 2 . Addison-Wesley. [4] Pike, R. and Thompson, K. (1992). Hello world or καλημ ´ερα κ ´oσμε . Proceedings of USENIX Winter 1993 .[5] Beltagy, I., Peters, M. E., and Cohan, A. (2020). Longformer: The long-document transformer. 

arXiv:2004.05150 .[6] Yang, Z., Dai, Z., Yang, Y., et al. (2019). XLNet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining. 

NeurIPS 2019 .   

> Note: A provisional patent application covering the encoding scheme, both variants, the hierarchy extension, all four bit-pair delimiter choices (including the {00 }power-efficiency embodiment), and infrastructure applications described herein has been filed with the Indian Patent Office (2026). The C reference implementation will be released at [GitHub URL] under MIT license. The author declares no competing financial interests beyond the filed patent application.

11