Title: Adaptive Sensing beyond Non-Adaptive Information Limits: End-to-End Co-Design of Geometry, Policy, and Inference

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.25193v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Apr 2026 00:34:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 58

Markdown Content:
# Adaptive Sensing beyond Non-Adaptive Information Limits: End-to-End Co-Design of Geometry, Policy, and Inference 

Arvin Keshvari, William Tuxbury, Zin Lin ∗

Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060 

April 29, 2026 

Abstract 

Inverse design has made vast physical parameter spaces a substrate for emergent behav-ior. In sensing, the stakes of this principle are sharpest at the analog-to-digital boundary, where any information the hardware fails to capture is information no downstream algo-rithm can recover; hardware optimization alone is therefore not enough, and the geometry must be co-designed with a rule for what to measure next. We formulate this co-design as 

joint dynamic programming (joint-DP): a single optimization over the continuous hardware geometry and a Bellman-optimal adaptive measurement policy. The outer hardware gradi-ent is computed by differentiable dynamic programming with a sharp Bellman maximum, which the envelope theorem makes exact and bias-free, and a relaxation hierarchy carries the common framework from small discrete POMDPs to 10 5-pixel photonic topologies. Across three case studies, joint-DP beats the natural baseline of its community by a large factor: on a radar beam-search POMDP, classical information-bound-guided geometry selection loses 2.8× in attainable adaptive value; on a superconducting-qubit flux sensor, joint-DP reduces deployed mean-squared error by 11 .3× over the joint Bayesian Cram´ er–Rao baseline, with both geometries numerically co-optimized under their respective objectives; and on a 90 ,000-pixel photonic metasensor, joint-DP via the Bayesian Fisher-information-matrix surrogate reduces deployed mean-squared error by 123 × relative to a randomized baseline. For any sensor whose hardware is designed once but whose policy runs for the device’s lifetime, joint optimization of hardware and policy is the minimum principled procedure. 

# Contents 

1 Introduction 2

1.1 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41.2 Relation to prior work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41.3 Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2 Problem setup and the scalar-reward family 5

2.1 Sensor model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.2 Joint optimization statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.3 The scalar-reward family Φ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72.4 Comparison and operational guidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

3 Value decomposition and the ignorance gap 8

3.1 The four functionals and their ordering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.2 Why joint hardware–policy co-design is necessary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93.3 Why EVPI is not a shortcut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

> ∗

Corresponding author: zinlin@vt.edu 

1

> arXiv:2604.25193v1 [physics.optics] 28 Apr 2026

4 Differentiable dynamic programming for the outer gradient 10 

4.1 Differentiable DP in context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 4.2 The envelope identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 4.3 Unfolding the envelope gradient through the Bellman recursion . . . . . . . . . . 11 4.4 Consequences and the outer policy-iteration algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 4.5 A note on continuous actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 

5 A hierarchy of relaxations 13 6 Case Study A: Radar beam search (exact DP, discrete state, ΦMI ) 16 

6.1 Problem setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 6.2 Enumeration results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 6.3 Sweep over the top-hat beam width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 6.4 Three-way comparison: EVPI picks the wrong geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 6.5 Optimal adaptive policy structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 

7 Case Study B: Superconducting-qubit flux sensor (exact DP, continuous state, ΦVar ) 18 

7.1 Problem setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 7.2 Exact Bellman DP via count-statistic memoization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7.3 Joint-DP co-design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7.4 Joint PCRB baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7.5 Deployed MSE comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 7.6 Why ϕmax = 0 .1: aliasing, horizon, and PCRB validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 

8 Case Study C: Photonic metasensor (rung-4 surrogate, 10 5-dim continuous c,

ΦVar ) 20 

8.1 Problem setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 8.2 Physics and differentiability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 8.3 Joint optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 8.4 Optimized binary design and loss trajectory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 8.5 Monte-Carlo EKF deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 8.6 Feasibility discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 

9 Discussion 23 

9.1 The common shape of the adaptive advantage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 9.2 Why the PCRB baseline loses even when it co-optimizes c . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 9.3 What the EVPI is still good for . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 9.4 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 9.5 Open directions: dynamical state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 

10 Conclusion 25 

# 1 Introduction 

Modern deep learning has revealed that emergent intelligent behavior can be extracted from op-timization over vast parameter spaces: neural networks with billions of weights, trained by gradi-ent descent against differentiable objectives, produce capabilities no hand-designed architecture reaches. A structurally analogous revolution has been unfolding in physics. Photonic crys-tals engineer electromagnetic band structure through lattice geometries no monatomic medium provides [1]; metasurfaces compress wavefront-shaping into subwavelength films through the or-chestration of millions of sub-wavelength scatterers [2]; inverse-designed photonics [3–7] achieves 2mode converters, spectral filters, and freeform functional elements in footprints no hand-designed waveguide can reach; acoustic and elastic metamaterials confer effective negative moduli through sub-unit-cell resonances [8]; topological photonics [9] and iridescent biological structures [10] exploit long-range geometric order to produce behavior no constituent chemistry can. The tem-plate is the same as deep learning’s: a vast parameter space, namely the geometry of a physical medium, optimized by gradient descent against a differentiable physical objective (scattering amplitudes, information content, coherent-addition structure) produces functional behavior no simple structure can. In this sense, structural complexity in physics is the analog of represen-tational complexity in deep networks : both are substrates through which optimization converts raw degrees of freedom into engineered capability. The consequence is that physical hardware optimization is not a peripheral engineering concern but a fundamental question about where intelligence can live. This question sharpens dramatically in sensing and metrology, at the analog-to-digital boundary where a physical signal becomes a digital record and any information lost there bounds everything any downstream algorithm can recover. The conventional blueprint of the last two decades pairs a generic, task-agnostic transducer front-end with powerful digital recon-struction, and so treats the physical hardware as a passive conduit and asks the digital stages to rescue whatever structure the geometry happens to impose. Computational inverse design already inverts this blueprint on the hardware side, routinely saturating the electromagnetic performance bounds of the underlying scattering problem [3, 5, 11, 12], and end-to-end optical co-design extends it by tying the geometry to a downstream reconstruction network, closing the loop from physics to inference in a single gradient [13–22]. What remains missing is the policy dimension: the recognition that the geometry must co-design with a rule for what to measure next , i.e., a multi-step adaptive measurement policy that reacts to intermediate data. When such a policy is installed, part of the intelligence-extraction work migrates upstream into the analog domain before digitization, and the co-optimized geometry becomes a participant in the inference itself rather than a conduit to it. This paper supplies that missing dimension. A mature literature on adaptive sensing and sequential Bayesian experimental design con-structs formally-optimal multi-step measurement policies for partially-observable Markov deci-sion processes (POMDPs) [23–35], but treats the physical hardware as immutable. The hard-ware half (inverse design, end-to-end optics) and the policy half (adaptive-sensing POMDP the-ory) are thus designed separately, each community optimizing its own half against the other’s default: a textbook setup for a joint optimum that nobody reaches. Several near-relatives live in the intersection without closing it: cognitive radar adapts the waveform on a fixed an-tenna [36–39], Kitaev-style quantum phase estimation adapts the pulse sequence on a fixed circuit [40–46], programmable-metasurface imaging adapts the reconstruction on a fixed scat-tering medium [47, 48], and variational quantum sensing parametrizes the probe through a trainable neural ansatz rather than a geometric topology [49, 50]. None of these treats con-tinuous physical geometry and a multi-step Bellman-optimal measurement policy as co-equal design variables in a single optimization. Closing this gap requires a framework that (a) is cleanly defined across discrete and contin-uous state spaces, (b) admits a tractable outer gradient with respect to the physical geometry, and (c) offers a hierarchy of relaxations scaling from exact dynamic programming on small POMDPs to high-dimensional continuous hardware inverse design. We supply all three, and call the procedure joint dynamic programming , or joint-DP : a single optimization that treats the continuous hardware c and the Bellman-optimal adaptive policy π as co-equal decision variables, with π re-solved by dynamic programming at each outer iterate in c. To our knowledge, this is the first formulation in which continuous physical hardware and a multi-step Bellman-optimal adaptive policy are co-designed as a single optimization problem. Joint-DP improves on the two natural baselines that bracket the problem, on benchmarks where exact comparison is tractable. The adaptive-sensing POMDP literature runs the Bellman 3dynamic-programming (DP) recursion, the standard backward-in-time value-iteration procedure that solves for an optimal measurement policy at fixed hardware. Joint-DP strictly generalizes this by co-optimizing c under the adaptive policy, yielding a 123 × deployed-MSE improve-ment on the photonic metasensor of Case Study C over a randomized baseline. The OED and physics-of-bounds literatures select c to maximize a prior-averaged, fixed-schedule information functional (mutual information, expected-Fisher log-determinant, Expected Value of Perfect Information) and attach an adaptive policy afterwards; on the radar POMDP of Case Study A the information-functional-maximizing c loses a factor of 2 .8× in attainable adaptive value to the joint-DP optimum, and on the superconducting-qubit flux sensor of Case Study B the joint Bayesian Cram´ er–Rao fixed-schedule baseline loses a factor of 11 .3× in deployed Bayesian MSE (z = +132 σ). The performance gaps are first-order in engineering terms. 

1.1 Contributions 

1. Unified formulation. A family of pointwise scalar rewards Φ( x, s, c) (mutual-information-aligned Φ MI [31], Bayesian-MSE-aligned Φ Var , and Fisher-log-det Φ log J [51, 52]) fit the same joint-( c, π ) Bellman machinery. The pointwise dependence on the unknown state x is the native reward form of POMDP theory, but it is rarely foregrounded in the adaptive-sensing and Bayesian-OED communities, which typically work directly with prior-averaged belief functionals; foregrounding it is what unifies three traditionally separate reward families under one umbrella and what makes the oracle / fixed / adaptive decomposition of §3well-defined. Choosing Φ is a modeling commitment set by the problem’s deployment metric. 2. A sharp-max, bias-free differentiable DP for belief-state POMDPs. We compute the outer hardware gradient of a POMDP Bellman recursion by keeping the max operator sharp throughout and appealing to the envelope theorem [53, 54] at the Bellman-optimal argmax; reverse-mode automatic differentiation through an argmax-frozen version of the recursion returns an exact, unbiased hardware gradient with no smoothing temperature. This differs from the dominant softmax-regularized and implicit-KKT lines of differen-tiable DP [55–58] in both method (no smoothing of the max; no re-formulation of the inner problem via KKT surrogates) and setting (belief-state POMDPs with Bayesian measure-ment dynamics, rather than fully-observed MDPs or structured-prediction trellises); to our knowledge the combination is new to the differentiable-DP literature. 3. Quantitative findings. On benchmarks where exact comparison is tractable, joint-DP delivers performance gaps of 2 .8× against classical information-bound-guided geometry selection (radar, Case Study A); 11 .3× at z = +132 σ in deployed Bayesian MSE against the joint Bayesian Cram´ er–Rao baseline [59, 60] (scqubit, Case Study B); and 123 × in deployed MSE against a randomized design (photonic, Case Study C). 4. Portability across scales. A relaxation cascade (exact DP, certainty-equivalent, myopic one-step, Fisher-trace plus EKF) carries the framework from small POMDPs to a 90 ,000-pixel photonic metasensor, with each rung’s failure mode named. 

1.2 Relation to prior work 

The components of our framework are individually well-established: exact Bellman DP for POMDPs [24, 25, 61]; mutual information as an experimental-design reward (Lindley [31]); end-to-end optical co-design with learned reconstruction, including information-reward end-to-end imaging by Waller and collaborators [62–65]; differentiable dynamic programming as a gradient-propagation vehicle [55–58]; the envelope/Danskin theorem [53, 54, 66]; Expected Value of Perfect Information as a classical decision-theoretic quantity [67, 68]. The joint optimization of 4continuous physical hardware with a multi-step Bellman-optimal adaptive policy is not standard in any of these: end-to-end optics uses one-step reconstructions, adaptive sensing fixes the hardware, and the EVPI/IG line does not treat continuous physical geometry as a first-class design variable. Each ingredient is classical; the novelty is their synthesis into a single joint optimization over continuous physical hardware and a multi-step Bellman-optimal adaptive policy, with sharp-max differentiable DP as the vehicle for the outer gradient. Our framework sits downstream of, and is complementary to, the recent program on funda-mental limits to light–matter interaction via convex-duality and T-matrix methods [11, 12, 69– 80]: those bounds certify whether a target is achievable by any passive medium; we select the c

that realizes it along with the policy that consumes it. Likewise for the quantum Fisher informa-tion program on wave and photon scattering [81–87]: our Φ log J choice in the Gaussian-posterior regime is the Bayesian analog of the maximum-Fisher-information-state object; outside that regime it shares the stage with alternative scalar rewards chosen by the problem’s deployment metric. 

1.3 Organization 

The paper builds up from formulation to evidence. Section 2 states the joint-( c, π ) optimization and develops the family of pointwise scalar rewards Φ. Section 3 introduces the value decom-position and the ignorance gap. Section 4 develops differentiable dynamic programming as the vehicle for the outer gradient; Section 5 catalogs the relaxation hierarchy. Sections 6, 7, and 8 are the three case studies (discrete POMDP; continuous-state qubit sensor; high-dimensional photonic metasensor). Sections 9–10 discuss limitations and conclude. 

# 2 Problem setup and the scalar-reward family 

2.1 Sensor model 

A sensor in this paper is a tuple ( c, π ) where c ∈ C ⊆ Rdc is a continuous physical geometry fixed at manufacturing time (the flux-bias and readout-line mutual inductances of a SQUID loop, the permittivity distribution of an inverse-designed metasurface, the elements of a phased-array antenna), and π : B → S is a measurement policy that maps the current belief b ∈ B over the unknown state x ∈ X to an action s ∈ S . At each step k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } the policy emits an action sk = π(bk), whose execution produces a measurement yk ∈ Y drawn from the likelihood 

yk ∼ p(yk | x, sk; c), (1) where Y is the measurement space specified by the physical readout (discrete detector counts in a photon-starved regime, photon clicks in a Ramsey sequence, real-valued voltages from a homodyne detector, etc.) and c parametrizes the likelihood through its physical forward model (Maxwell’s equations, circuit Hamiltonian dynamics, Schr¨ odinger evolution with pulse shaping, etc.). For non-adaptive (“fixed-schedule”) policies π is a constant function of the belief; for adaptive policies π depends on the history Fk−1 = {s1: k−1, y1: k−1} through the posterior 

bk = p(x | F k−1; c). We write K for the horizon (the total number of measurement steps the operator is budgeted before an estimate of x is reported, which may be limited by coherence time in a quantum sensor, by integration-time budget in a radar search, or by throughput requirements in an imaging pipeline), p0(x) for the prior, and reserve π⋆(c) for the Bellman-optimal policy at fixed c. Inner expectations are over observations y with x, c held fixed; outer expectations are over the prior p0.52.2 Joint optimization statement 

A joint co-design objective is any scalar functional of the hardware-policy pair, 

V (c, π ) = Ex∼p0 Ey1: K |x,π, c

 Φ( x, sπ 

> 1: K

, c) , (2) where Φ : X × S K × C → R is a user-specified pointwise reward : “pointwise” in the sense that Φ is evaluated at each realization of the true state x, action sequence s1: K , and hardware c

separately, before any averaging over the prior. Aggregate objectives (Bayesian mean-squared error, mutual information, log-determinant of an expected Fisher matrix) are recovered by taking the expectations in Equation (2). We correspondingly use “pointwise MSE” for the state-conditional mean-squared error Ey|x[( ˆ x − x)2], which is an x-dependent scalar, as opposed to the aggregate Bayesian MSE which is its prior average. The joint hardware–policy optimization solves (c⋆, π ⋆) = arg max 

> c∈C , π ∈Π

V (c, π ). (3) Equation (3) is the sole formal statement in the paper; what varies across applications is only the choice of Φ. Two degenerate cases recover classical programs: Π = {constant policies } with Φ minus a reconstruction loss recovers end-to-end optics [13, 14]; C = {c0} (fixed hardware) with any Φ recovers adaptive sensor management [23, 26]. Their pairing is the content of this paper. For the posterior-mean estimator on continuous x, the tower-law identity E[( ˆ xpm − x)2] = 

E[Var( x | bK )] makes the Bayesian MSE a special case of V (c, π ) with Φ = −Var( x | bK ). Section 2.3 develops this and two alternative Φ choices used by the other case studies. 

Two-level structure (joint-DP). When Π is the full space of adaptive policies, the inner arg max π in Equation (3) is solved by the Bellman recursion on the belief state bk (full derivation from Equation (2) in the accompanying supplement), 

VK (b; c) = Ex|b[ Φ 0(x, b; c) ] , (4) 

Vk(b; c) = max   

> sk∈S

Eyk |b,sk ,c

 Vk+1 

 T (b, sk, yk; c); c  , k = K − 1, . . . , 0, (5) where T (b, s, y; c) is the Bayesian belief-update operator, 

T (b, s, y; c)( x) = p(y | x, s; c) b(x)

R 

> X

p(y | x′, s; c) b(x′) dx′ , (6) the posterior over x obtained from prior b by Bayes’ rule given one measurement y taken at action s under hardware c (the integral in the denominator is a sum for discrete x). Φ 0(x, bK ; c)is the terminal pointwise reward written as a function of the terminal belief; for Φ log J the belief is augmented by the accumulated Fisher-information matrix, and Φ 0 is read off the augmentation. The inner optimal policy at each step is π⋆k(b; c) = arg max sk Eyk [Vk+1 (T (b, sk, yk; c); c)], and the joint hardware-policy optimum is the outer maximum of the inner DP value at the initial belief b0 = p0,

c⋆ = arg max 

> c∈C

V ⋆(c), V ⋆(c) := V0(b0; c). (7) We call Equations (4)–(7) the joint-DP structure: an outer continuous optimization over the physical geometry c wrapped around an inner Bellman recursion that produces the optimal adaptive policy π⋆(c) at each candidate c. Section 4 develops differentiable dynamic program-ming as the vehicle for the outer c-gradient, which decouples from the inner Bellman solve via the envelope theorem; Section 5 describes a cascade of relaxations for the inner recursion when exact DP is infeasible. 62.3 The scalar-reward family Φ

Three canonical choices for Φ emerge naturally from three different bodies of theory. In each case Φ is a deterministic function of ( x, s1: K , c); any expectation over the measurement trajectory 

y1: K that appears in the definition is baked in, so that the outer objective V (c, π ) = Ex,y[Φ] of Equation (2) is a single expectation over the prior and the data. 

Mutual-information-aligned reward ΦMI . Following the Shannon–Lindley line [31, 88] through Chaloner–Verdinelli [35], Sebastiani–Wynn [89], and the adaptive sensor-management literature [26, 27], ΦMI (x, s, c) = Ey|x,s,c

ln |supp( bK )| − H(bK ), (8) the expected negative entropy of the terminal belief bK at state x. Averaging over the prior gives 

Ex[Φ MI ] = I(x; y1: K | s, c), the mutual information. This is the reward of choice for discrete-state problems where MSE is undefined or dominated by 0/1 classification loss [28], and for any problem in the large-K Bernstein–von Mises regime [90, 91] (the asymptotic limit in which the posterior converges to a Gaussian centered near the true parameter, making MI monotone in MSE). The photonic and quantum-sensing communities have developed extensive machinery for 

upper bounds on achievable mutual information given physical constraints (reciprocity, passivity, energy); our framework consumes those bounds as constraints on the feasible set {ΦMI (·, ·, c) : 

c ∈ C} rather than re-deriving them. 

Bayesian-MSE-aligned reward ΦVar . Inheriting from the Bayesian Cram´ er–Rao tradi-tion [59] and the posterior-variance-minimization line of Bayesian optimal experimental de-sign [35, 92], the tower law of variance (the identity that the Bayes-averaged squared error of the posterior mean equals the Bayes-averaged posterior variance) 

Ex,y1: K

( ˆ xpm − x)2 = Ey1: K [Var( x | y1: K )] (9) (with ˆ xpm the posterior mean) motivates ΦVar (x, s, c) = Ey|x,s,c

−Var( x | bK ), (10) for which the outer objective V (c, π ) equals −1× the deployed Bayesian MSE exactly. The joint-DP optimum of this reward is literally the MSE-optimal adaptive policy at fixed c, without any asymptotic approximation. For continuous-state, finite-K problems with bounded-support priors, where the Bernstein–von Mises regime is not reached, Φ Var strictly dominates Φ MI as an MSE anchor. The tower-law identity is textbook; its use as a joint-DP terminal reward in the present hardware-policy setting is new. 

Fisher-information-aligned reward Φlog J . Inheriting from the classical Fisher-information-matrix tradition [51, 52, 93] and its Bayesian extension [59, 60], and applicable to continuous 

x with a Gaussian-posterior surrogate, Φlog J (x, s, c) = 12 log det JN (x, s1: K , c), (11) where JN is the accumulated Fisher information matrix at true x. The outer expectation is the log-determinant of the Bayesian Fisher information matrix [35, 94], with J−1 

> N

the Bayesian CRB. In the Gaussian-posterior regime Φ log J agrees with Φ Var up to log-transforms. Outside that regime (biased estimators, bounded priors, small K), Φ log J retains an asymptotic CRB interpretation while losing its direct link to finite-sample MSE. It is the natural reward for high-dimensional continuous problems where the full Bellman DP is intractable and the Gaus-sian surrogate is the cheapest defensible relaxation. The quantum-Fisher-information program 7on wave and photon scattering [81–83, 85] and the photonic information-bound program on scattering-matrix extremization [11, 12, 69–71] establish upper bounds on det JN over admis-sible c; they tell us what sup c det JN is, and our framework tells us which c and which policy realize it jointly. 

2.4 Comparison and operational guidance 

Table 1: Three natural pointwise scalar rewards, their operational semantics, and their align-ment with finite-K MSE. reward terminal expression community tied to pointwise MSE? ΦMI ln |supp( bK )| − H(bK ) sensor management, sOED asymptotic only ΦVar −Var( x | bK ) Bayesian estimation directly, by tower law 

Φlog J 12 log det JN (x, s, c) Fisher info, PCRB asymptotic only The three rewards agree asymptotically under Bernstein–von Mises but diverge at finite horizons, and the choice of Φ matters operationally for the co-design optimum at modest horizon on a bounded prior. We accordingly present the paper’s machinery as reward-agnostic: the user picks Φ based on the problem’s state space, horizon, and deployment metric, and the differentiable-DP outer gradient of Section 4 derives identically from any of them. 

# 3 Value decomposition and the ignorance gap 

For any choice of Φ, the outer objective V (c, π ) admits a four-functional decomposition that is useful for both intuition and diagnostics. The decomposition is standard in sequential Bayesian experimental design [32, 33] and was used in the radar sensor-management literature under the name “oracle value” of perfect information [26, 95]; we restate it in the Φ-agnostic form used in the rest of the paper. 

3.1 The four functionals and their ordering 

Voracle (x, c) = max 

> s1: K

Φ( x, s1: K , c), (12) 

Vfixed (c) = max 

> s1: K

Ex

Φ( x, s1: K , c), (13) 

Vadaptive (c) = max  

> π∈Π

ExEy|x,π, c

Φ( x, sπ 

> 1: K

, c), (14) 

E[IG]( c) = Ex[Voracle (x, c)] − Vfixed (c). (15) 

Voracle (x, c) is the value attained by a clairvoyant sensor that knows the true x and picks the best fixed schedule for it. Vfixed (c) is the best non-adaptive schedule, Vadaptive (c) is the best adaptive policy (the quantity the user ultimately deploys), and E[IG]( c), the expected ignorance gap or expected value of perfect information (EVPI) [67, 68], measures how much adaptive slack exists at that geometry. The three values are ordered at every c,

Vfixed (c) ≤ Vadaptive (c) ≤ Ex[Voracle (x, c)] , (16) because fixed schedules are a subset of adaptive policies (left) and no policy can beat the clairvoyant oracle (right). Subtracting Vfixed from Equation (16) bounds the adaptive gain 

Vadaptive (c) − Vfixed (c) above by the EVPI: 0 ≤ Vadaptive (c) − Vfixed (c) ≤ E[IG]( c). (17) 8If this upper bound were tight, the EVPI-maximizing geometry would coincide with the adaptive-gain-maximizing one, the hope that motivates the EVPI as a candidate design criterion. §3.3 shows the hope does not survive scrutiny. 

3.2 Why joint hardware–policy co-design is necessary 

The quantity the user deploys is Vadaptive (c), so the question is which hardware maximizes that deployed value. Two facts make it a function of c that cannot be maximized piecewise. 

Fact 1: adaptation extracts real value at most geometries. A fixed schedule commits all K measurements in advance, before any data has arrived. An adaptive policy sees each outcome as it happens and re-routes subsequent measurements accordingly: effort that would have been wasted confirming something the data has already settled gets redirected toward parts of the state space that remain ambiguous. In an imaging problem this is the difference between a fixed raster scan and one that zooms in on the suspected region; in a qubit-flux sensor it is the difference between a fixed Ramsey delay ladder and one that shortens τ when the posterior is broad (to avoid phase-wrapping ambiguity) and lengthens τ once the flux is roughly localized. The adaptive gain of Equation (17) is therefore typically strictly positive and often sizable. 

Fact 2: the adaptive gain depends nontrivially on c. A hardware configuration that maximizes Vfixed is not in general the hardware that maximizes Vadaptive : a geometry good for blind schedules is good because its expected measurements are individually informative on average, and that property tends to leave little room for outcome-dependent re-routing. Conversely, a geometry with very large oracle value (the right-hand side of Equation (16)) may put so much of that value out of reach of any policy that only sees past data that the realizable adaptive value is actually small. The geometry that deploys well under an adaptive policy is an 

interior geometry, one that neither is over-tuned to blind schedules nor relies on clairvoyance; this optimum is not located by examining Vfixed or Voracle separately. 

Consequence: the two layers cannot be solved in sequence. One cannot pick c first (by any single-functional criterion) and then pick π, because the criterion for a good c depends on which π will follow. Joint optimization of ( c, π ) is necessary; the rest of the paper is about making it tractable. Section 4 shows how differentiable dynamic programming (with the enve-lope theorem providing the sharp-max exactness certificate) decouples the gradient computation 

from the inner-policy solve even when the two quantities themselves do not decouple, so that an outer-loop optimizer can climb Vadaptive (c) with a single Bellman solve per iteration. 

3.3 Why EVPI is not a shortcut 

It is worth asking whether the EVPI can stand in for Vadaptive as a design criterion. Since 

Voracle and Vfixed are computable by direct schedule enumeration (no Bellman recursion, no belief tree), E[IG]( c) is a cheap scalar functional of c, unlike Vadaptive (c) which requires the full backward-in-time value iteration. The shortcut fails: the upper bound in Equation (17) is slack, and its slackness pattern is non-monotone in c, so arg max 

> c

E[IG]( c)̸ = arg max 

> c

Vadaptive (c). (18) Extreme geometries (a very narrow beam, a near-isotropic beam) produce high EVPI because the oracle’s advantage over any blind fixed schedule is enormous, but the adaptive policy, which does not know x, cannot replicate the oracle’s strategy and captures only a small fraction of the 9nominal headroom. Interior geometries have a modest EVPI ceiling but let the adaptive policy capture a larger fraction of it, which is what ultimately matters. On the radar benchmark of Section 6, the EVPI-maximizing geometry loses a factor of 2 .8× in attainable Vadaptive to the joint-DP optimum; the joint solve is unavoidable. EVPI retains useful roles as a workflow tool rather than a design target: a cheap pre-screen when schedule enumeration is tractable but the full joint DP is not; a post-hoc gap-to-oracle diagnostic at c⋆; and an interpretive lens on the shape of the c-landscape. §9 develops these. 

# 4 Differentiable dynamic programming for the outer gradient 

4.1 Differentiable DP in context 

The outer joint-DP optimization (Equation (7)) requires a gradient of the inner Bellman value 

V ⋆(c) = V0(p0; c) with respect to the continuous hardware c. The inner Bellman recursion (Equations (4)–(5)) contains a max over actions at every layer, and max is non-smooth. Differ-entiating a nested max-over-expectations recursion is therefore the load-bearing operation, and it is the subject of a now-active ML literature under the name differentiable dynamic program-ming [55–58]. Two strategies for handling the max dominate the landscape: 

Smooth-max (the dominant approach). Replace max with a smooth relaxation (softmax, Tsallis entropy-regularization, Boltzmann averaging) so the recursion becomes everywhere-differentiable and reverse-mode automatic differentiation handles the rest. This is the path taken by Mensch & Blondel [55], differentiable-MPC work [56], and a broader family of implicit-differentiation methods [57, 58]. The price is a regularization bias : the smoothed recursion no longer evaluates V ⋆(c) exactly, and the gradient is biased by an amount controlled by the smoothing temperature. The bias can be driven to zero by annealing the temperature, but the limit requires a schedule that is itself a hyperparameter. 

Sharp-max via envelope (the approach of this paper). Keep the max operator sharp in the recursion and use the envelope theorem [53, 54, 66, 96] to certify that, at the Bellman-optimal argmax, the indirect contribution of argmax sensitivity to ∂V ⋆/∂ c vanishes. The recursion keeps its exact Bellman value, and reverse-mode AD through an argmax-frozen 

version of the recursion returns an exact, unbiased hardware gradient with no smoothing bias and no temperature schedule. The two strategies trade smoothness for exactness. Smooth-max gives everywhere-differentiable code and a biased gradient; sharp-max gives exact gradients and requires one additional struc-tural step (freezing the argmax) to take advantage of the envelope identity. For the physical-hardware gradients this paper is concerned with, where biases in ∂V ⋆/∂ c could steer the outer optimization to the wrong c⋆ and the inner Bellman DP is already exact on its own terms, the sharp-max path is the natural choice. Two further distinctions from the existing differentiable-DP literature are worth noting: we work on belief-state POMDPs rather than fully-observed MDPs or structured-prediction trellises, and the hardware parameter c enters both the obser-vation likelihood and the Bayesian belief update T , rather than parametrizing transition costs or trellis scores directly. The remainder of this section develops the sharp-max path in that set-ting: the envelope identity ( §4.2), its operational form unfolded through the Bellman recursion (§4.3), and the consequences and outer policy-iteration algorithm that consumes the gradient (§4.4). 

4.2 The envelope identity 

Let π⋆(c) = arg max π∈Π V (c, π ) be the optimal policy at hardware c. The joint-optimal geom-etry solves 

c⋆ = arg max 

> c

V ⋆(c), V ⋆(c) := V (c, π ⋆(c)) . (19) 10 A naive outer gradient requires differentiating through the policy argmax: 

dV ⋆

dc = ∂V ∂c π=π⋆(c)

+ ∂V ∂π π=π⋆(c)

| {z }

> =0 at optimum

· dπ ⋆

dc . (20) The second term vanishes at the optimum by the first-order optimality condition (or, in discrete-action settings, by the envelope/Danskin theorem [53, 66, 96]). Consequently the outer gradient is simply 

dV ⋆

dc = ∂V (c, π ⋆(c)) 

∂c π⋆ held fixed 

. (21) The policy Jacobian dπ ⋆/d c does not appear. 

4.3 Unfolding the envelope gradient through the Bellman recursion 

Equation (21) gives the envelope gradient in its abstract form. Making it operational requires unfolding through the Bellman recursion of Equations (4)–(5) to identify the concrete paths by which c enters V ⋆. The result is a backward-recursion formula for ∂V k/∂ c that mirrors the Bellman recursion for Vk, and that can be computed by reverse-mode automatic differentiation with a single structural step: freeze the argmax. Define the Q-function 

Qk(b, sk; c) := Eyk |b,sk ,c

Vk+1 

 T (b, sk, yk; c); c , (22) so that the Bellman recursion reads Vk(b; c) = max sk Qk(b, sk; c) with s⋆k(b; c) := arg max sk Qk.The total derivative of Vk with respect to c splits into an indirect piece (via s⋆k) and a direct piece: 

∂V k

∂c (b; c) = ∂Q k

∂sk

(b, s⋆k; c) · ∂s⋆k

∂c (b; c)

| {z }

> =0 at the argmax

+ ∂Q k

∂c (b, s⋆k; c). (23) The first term vanishes at an interior argmax by first-order optimality ( ∂Q k/∂ sk = 0 at s⋆k). What survives is the partial derivative of Qk holding s⋆k fixed, the per-step envelope identity 

∂V k

∂c (b; c) = ∂Q k

∂c (b, s⋆k; c). (24) Unfolding ∂Q k/∂ c using the product and chain rules, three contributions enter: 

∂V k

∂c (b; c) = Eyk |b,s⋆k ,c

"

∂ log p(yk | b, s⋆k, c)

∂c Vk+1 

 T (· · · ); c| {z }

> (i) score / outcome-likelihood term

+ ∂V k+1 

∂b

 T ; c · ∂T (b, s⋆k, yk; c)

∂c| {z }

> (ii) belief-update term

+ ∂V k+1 

∂c

 T ; c| {z }

> (iii) recursive term

#

, (25) with terminal condition ∂V K /∂ c = ∂Φ0(x, bK ; c)/∂ c at the terminal belief. The three terms pick up the three ways c enters the Bellman backup once the argmax is frozen: through the outcome distribution (i), through the Bayesian belief update T (ii), and through the recursive dependence of Vk+1 itself (iii). Equation (25) mirrors Equation (5): same DP graph, same backward sweep order, same memoization structure. If Vk fits in memory (whether as an exact hash table, a count-tuple dictionary, or a Gaussian-moment parametrization), so does ∂V k/∂ c.11 The operational recipe: argmax-freeze, then reverse-mode AD. One does not imple-ment Equation (25) by hand. The workflow is: 1. Forward pass. Run backward induction from k = K down to k = 0, populating Vk and recording s⋆k at every reachable belief summary. No AD tape is active. 2. Gradient pass. Re-evaluate V0(p0; c) by substituting the recorded s⋆k in place of max sk .The resulting expression is argmax-free and, by Equation (21), identically equal to V ⋆(c). 3. Reverse-mode AD. Apply an AD system to the gradient-pass code. Because the expression is composed of closed-form primitives in c (the likelihood, the belief update, the terminal re-ward) and c-free combinators (sums, products, argmax lookups), AD returns ∂V 0/∂ c exactly with no custom rule for the Bellman max. Freezing the argmax turns the non-smooth max-containing recursion into an ordinary differ-entiable expression: that is the operational content of the envelope theorem. Without it, AD would try to differentiate through the max and produce subgradient terms that Equation (21) tells us are already zero at the optimum. 

Concrete realizations across case studies. In Case Study A (radar, discrete belief), the per-step envelope gradient reduces to a finite sum over reachable beliefs; ∂ Pr /∂ c and ∂T /∂ c

have closed forms in the beam-pattern parameter. In Case Study B (qubit, count-tuple state), the only c-carrying primitive in the entire DP is the Ramsey likelihood of Equation (28); all of the count-tuple combinatorics, action grid, and memoization are c-free, so the reverse-mode AD graph consists of one closed-form function composed through the DP tree via the chain rule. In Case Study C (photonic, Gaussian-posterior surrogate), the envelope theorem specializes to the implicit-function-theorem adjoint over the inner sensor-parameter argmax, and the per-step 

∂Q k/∂ c becomes a closed-form expression in the FDFD S-matrix derivatives; see §8. 

4.4 Consequences and the outer policy-iteration algorithm 

Equations (21) and (25) are the workhorses of the paper; together they give the sharp-max differentiable-DP outer gradient. Four consequences: 1. The outer gradient requires solving the inner problem once (to obtain π⋆(c)) and then differentiating V through the likelihood with the policy held fixed. This decouples the computational cost of the Bellman DP from the cost of the outer gradient. 2. When π⋆(c) is computed only approximately (by deep RL, by an approximate value it-eration, by a myopic one-step-lookahead), the envelope identity still says that at the 

approximate optimum the approximate policy Jacobian’s contribution to the outer gradi-ent is first-order small. The framework accommodates approximate inner solvers without bias. 3. The outer gradient is differentiable in c whenever the likelihood is. For photonic problems this is automatic via differentiable electromagnetic simulation [97, 98]; for quantum-circuit problems, via differentiable Hamiltonian dynamics [99]. 4. A trajectory-sampling Monte-Carlo realization is available: sample trajectories under π⋆,differentiate the trajectory log-likelihood times the terminal reward under c, average. This is the pathwise REINFORCE estimator [100, 101] specialized to the fixed-policy case. The natural outer-loop algorithm alternates Bellman solves with these gradient steps: 

Joint (c, π ) policy iteration: 

1. Initialize c(0) .2. For t = 1 , 2, . . . until convergence: 

• Inner: solve π⋆(c(t−1) ) (exact DP, deep RL, myopic, etc.). 

• Outer: c(t) = c(t−1) + η · ∂V (c(t−1) ,π ⋆(c(t−1) ))  

> ∂c

with step size η.

• Optionally: box-project c(t) onto the feasible set. 12 Convergence to a stationary point of V ⋆ follows from standard policy-iteration theory [102, 103] when the inner solver is exact; the envelope theorem extends this to approximate inner solvers provided the approximation error is o(η). 

4.5 A note on continuous actions 

Nothing in the differentiable-DP construction presupposes discrete actions. For continuous s,the Bellman backup’s inner maximization is a continuous optimization: 

Vk(b) = max  

> s∈S

Ey[Vk+1 (T (b, s, y))] , (26) with the terminal condition VK given by the inner expression of Φ at the terminal belief (Ta-ble 1). The k = 0 value under the optimal policy coincides with V (c, π ⋆) of Equation (2). Stan-dard tools, differential dynamic programming [104, 105], sample-based tree search [106, 107], local gradient inner optimization, HJB-PDE solutions [108], apply. The one caveat specific to our setting is that the standard count-statistic belief memoization used by discrete-action Bell-man DP (Section 6) fails for continuous actions because distinct inner-optimization candidates produce distinct child beliefs. We handle this in Case Study C by using the Gaussian-posterior surrogate, in which the belief state is finite-dimensional and the Bellman backup admits a one-step-lookahead closed form; and in Case Study B by log-spaced discretization of the continuous Ramsey-delay dimension at J = 10 grid points. 

# 5 A hierarchy of relaxations 

The joint ( c, π ) optimization of Section 2 is exactly solvable only for small discrete POMDPs. When exact Bellman DP is intractable, two distinct philosophies emerge for handling the inner optimization. 

Dichotomy at the exact-DP branch point. The dominant approach in modern reinforce-ment learning is to parametrize the policy πθ (or the action-value Qθ) with a neural network and optimize it by policy gradient, Q-learning, or actor–critic [109, 110]. We do not pursue this branch in the present paper, though we do not rule it out for future work. The reason is a well-documented pathology: an expressive NN policy can absorb the training signal and compensate for a poor c by investing in policy complexity, leaving c near its initialization. The outer loop converges to a hardware-light fixed point that looks good in simulation but relies on a near-trivial c hard to justify as a physical design. Known countermeasures partially mitigate the risk but do not yet admit the clean sharp-max differentiable-DP gradient our framework exploits: capacity control on πθ (bottleneck width, weight decay, dropout); two-timescale up-dates with c stepped on a faster clock than θ; warm-starts from one of the prescribed inner rules below (rungs 3–4); and auxiliary regularizers penalizing hardware-null geometries. We flag the combination of these remedies as a plausible path to extending joint-( c, π ) to expressive NN policies in future work, and correspondingly exclude NN-parametrized policies from the hierarchy below on a provisional rather than principled basis. 

The plausible-policy cascade (our path). The alternative, which we pursue, is to prescribe 

π in closed form as a plausibly Bellman-optimal rule at the affordable level of fidelity, and to focus the optimization machinery on c. Each rule is a closed-form arg max over sensor parameters given a belief summary, chosen as a principled heuristic that approximates the Bellman optimum at its feasibility ceiling; the outer loop then moves c. The hierarchy is a cascade : each rung is triggered by the previous becoming intractable. Because the policy at every rung is prescribed as an explicit function of the current posterior (or one of its coarsenings), this philosophy requires an explicit Bayesian filter as the inference 13 primitive: the filter supplies the sufficient statistic the prescribed rule consumes. Explicit inference is therefore a consequence of prescribing a plausible policy, not an independent design choice. This is what the cascade shares with exact DP (rung 1) and what sharply distinguishes our branch from the NN branch above, where a learned encoder over the raw observation history replaces the Bayesian filter entirely. What descends the cascade is (i) the policy’s proximity to the Bellman optimum (Bellman-optimal at rung 1, clairvoyant-CE at rung 2, myopic one-step at rungs 3–4), and correspondingly (ii) the coarseness of the belief summary the policy consumes (and the filter maintains): exact posterior, point estimate, full distribution, Gaussian moments. At no rung is the inference primitive replaced by a learned representation; the Bayesian filter is a first-class object throughout, because the prescribed policy requires it to be. The differentiable-DP gradient of Section 4 relies on this: it applies whenever the inner rule is a prescribed arg max over a belief-summary sufficient statistic, regardless of how coarsely that summary approximates the true posterior. 

Rung 1: exact Bellman DP. π⋆k = arg max sk Q⋆k(bk, sk), the true optimum. Inference: exact belief bk (tabulated for discrete state; on a KΦ-point grid for continuous state). Feasibility ceiling: reachable-belief memoization ∼ |S| K up to ∼ 10 6 on a single node. When this is violated, move to rung 2. 

Rung 2: certainty-equivalent control, full horizon. At step k, form a point estimate of the unknown state (posterior mean ˆ xk = E[x | bk] or posterior mode / MAP) and play the schedule the clairvoyant oracle would choose against ˆ xk. Inference: explicit point estimate from the filter. Near-optimal when the posterior concentrates rapidly and the oracle map is Lipschitz in x; known failure mode: under-exploration when ˆ xk is wrong. Feasibility ceiling: one oracle solve per decision step (itself an N -step enumeration or continuous optimization). When the per-step oracle solve is too expensive, move to rung 3. 

Rung 3: myopic one-step information criterion. Collapse the look-ahead to one step: 

sk = arg max sk Eyk |bk ,sk

Φ( x, sk, c), i.e., maximize the single-step expected information (or reward) gain conditional on the full current belief. Inference: full belief bk maintained by exact Bayesian update. Near-optimal by submodularity bounds for information-theoretic re-wards [111]; failure mode: myopia proper, i.e., no credit for information that pays off two or more steps out. Feasibility ceiling: one arg max over sk plus a full-belief expectation per step. When the full-belief expectation is itself too expensive (high-dimensional continuous x,for example), move to rung 4. 

Rung 4: Fisher-trace surrogate with EKF. Replace the information criterion by the Fisher-information trace evaluated at the posterior mean, and replace the exact Bayesian update by an extended Kalman filter: sk = arg max sk tr J( ¯ xk, sk, c) with bk ≈ N ( ¯ xk, Σk) propagated by EKF. Inference: Gaussian moments ( ¯ xk, Σk). This is the cheapest rung still compatible with continuous c, continuous x, and arbitrary state dimension. Failure modes: Gaussian approximation breaks near prior boundaries or under multimodal posteriors; EKF linearization fails when the forward model is strongly non-linear in x over the posterior support. 14 rung inner policy rule inference primitive triggered when rung above is intractable 1 exact Bellman arg max exact belief (grid / tab-ulated) n/a 2 certainty-equivalent oracle at ˆ xk point estimate ˆ xk memoization |S| K ≳

10 6

3 myopic arg max sk E[Φ | bk] full belief bk per-step oracle too expensive 4 tr J( ¯ xk, sk, c) + EKF Gaussian ( ¯ xk, Σk) full-belief expecta-tion too expensive Across all four rungs, the sharp-max differentiable-DP gradient applies cleanly to the outer 

c-gradient at the inner arg max (with the envelope theorem certifying exactness at the prescribed argmax), because the inner rule is a prescribed arg max over a belief-summary maintained by an explicit Bayesian filter. The case studies that follow operate at rungs 1, 1, and 4 respectively: Case Study A (radar) at rung 1 with discrete state; Case Study B (scqubit) at rung 1 with a grid-discretized continuous state; Case Study C (photonic metasensor) at rung 4 with ∼

10 5 continuous hardware parameters. No single rung uniformly dominates. Each names its feasibility ceiling and failure mode explicitly so that a practitioner can descend the cascade deliberately, stopping at the first rung that is tractable for the problem in front of them. 

An invitation to a broader research program. Once exact Bellman DP is relaxed, the inner policy becomes an approximation, and the full zoo of reinforcement-learning and prescribed-policy frameworks opens up (policy gradient, actor–critic, off-policy Q-learning, POMCP, information-directed sampling, distributional RL, Thompson sampling, model-based planning with learned dynamics, and many more), each with its own strengths, failure modes, and regimes of applicability. To our knowledge, this paper is the first to embed the optimization of continuous physical hardware c into this zoo, via sharp-max differentiable DP (the envelope-theorem-certified outer gradient) plus a prescribed, plausibly-Bellman-optimal inner rule. Cor-respondingly, each existing RL or prescribed-policy framework invites a c-aware revision (the “what does this framework look like when the hardware is a co-equal decision variable?” ques-tion) whose answer will generally require new theory (ensuring the c-gradient is well-defined and free of the hardware-light pathology), new algorithms (coordinating c-updates with the inner policy on compatible timescales, integrating regularizers that penalize hardware-null ge-ometries), and new numerics (quantifying how much each framework gains or loses when c is co-optimized rather than fixed). We view this as a new research area opened by the present formulation rather than exhausted by it; the four rungs above are the first systematic traversal, and many more remain. 

A deeper stake: intelligence migrating from digital to physical. Information loss at the analog-to-digital boundary upper-bounds any downstream reconstruction; joint ( c, π )optimization responds by shaping the physical geometry to participate in the inference rather than merely transduce for it. The relaxation cascade above carries this principle from the pedagogical small to the physically large. A co-optimized c is no longer a lens, an antenna, or a SQUID loop that merely transduces; it is a purpose-built information-preserving structure that filters, concentrates, and encodes the incoming signal in the geometry’s own complex degrees of freedom, shaped by the task and by the policy that will consume its output. The broader research program we invite is, in this view, a piece of the larger migration of intelligence from digital to physical: in place of a generic measurement whose deficit is rescued by deep networks downstream, the analog structure carries its task-aware share, and the juncture of information loss is relocated, narrowed, and in some regimes transcended. What exact Bellman DP proves 15 possible in the pedagogical small, the relaxed rungs make feasible in the physically large; and the physical structure, once co-optimized, is no longer a conduit for intelligence but a participant in it. 

# 6 Case Study A: Radar beam search (exact DP, discrete state, 

# ΦMI )

The radar beam-search case is the smallest non-trivial POMDP that exhibits the full Voracle /

Vfixed / Vadaptive / E[IG] decomposition, and it serves as the pedagogical entry point for the rest of the paper. 

Figure 1: Scene illustrations for the two case studies. Left (Case Study A, §6): a phased-array antenna interrogates a ring of 16 target cells; the true state (green, cell 11), the current beam pointing at cell sk = 5 with width m = 3, and the adaptive redirect selected by π⋆ at the next epoch. Right (Case Study B, §7): the x-mon transmon cross on sapphire with a SQUID loop (two Josephson junctions) at the end of the + x arm, the external flux Φ ext threading the loop, a meandering readout resonator, and the Bloch-sphere view of the qubit; the bottom timeline shows the adaptive Ramsey sequences sk = ( τk, n k) chosen by π⋆(bk) at each epoch. 

6.1 Problem setup 

State. x ∈ { 1, . . . , |X |} is a target cell on a ring of |X | = 16 cells. Prior p0(x) = 1 /|X | .

Action. At each of K = 4 epochs the sensor points a beam at cell sk ∈ { 1, . . . , |X |} .

Observation. yk ∈ { 0, 1} (miss/detection) with Bernoulli likelihood 

p(yk = 1 | x, sk; c) = pFA + ( pD − pFA ) · Gc(θsk − φx), (27) with pD = 0 .9, pFA = 0 .05, cell bearings φx = 2 π(x − 1) /|X | , and pointing angles θsk . The geometry family is a top-hat (uniform-sensitivity, rectangular-profile) beam parametrized by integer width m ∈ { 1, . . . , |X |} : the beam centered on cell a covers all cells within a ring distance of ⌊m/ 2⌋ from a, giving detection probability pD uniformly inside the beam and pFA 

uniformly outside. m is the discrete design variable we sweep below. 

Reward. Φ = Φ MI , since the state is discrete and there is no natural MSE. 16 6.2 Enumeration results 

The exact enumeration of Voracle , Vfixed , and backward-induction Vadaptive at |X | = 16, K = 4 is computationally modest (order 10 7 elementary operations, Julia runtime ∼ 0.1 s on a single thread). In the narrow-beam ( m = 1) and wide-beam ( m = 8) regimes we obtain: narrow ( m = 1) wide ( m = 8) 

Voracle 2.580 nats 1.923 nats 

Vadaptive 0.619 1.700 

Vfixed 0.499 1.411 

E[IG] 2.081 0.513 realized gain Vadaptive − Vfixed 0.121 0.289 EVPI saturation 5.8% 56 .4% Note the non-monotone relationship: the narrow regime has the largest E[IG] (more than 4× the wide regime’s) but the smallest realized adaptive gain (less than half). The narrow EVPI is “loose”, most of the adaptive headroom is unreachable by any policy at K = 4, while the wide EVPI is relatively tight. 

6.3 Sweep over the top-hat beam width 

Sweeping the integer beam width m ∈ { 1, . . . , |X |} and reporting all four functionals (consecu-tive pairs of m produce identical beams under the integer-width parametrization, so the table lists one representative per degenerate pair; the endpoints {1, 2} and {15 , 16 } are both shown to make the pairing explicit): 

m Voracle Vadaptive Vfixed E[IG] realized sat. % 1 2.580 0.619 0.499 2.081 0.121 5.82 2.580 0.619 0.499 2.081 0.121 5.83 2.293 1.401 1.103 1.190 0.299 25 .15 2.081 1.631 1.343 0.737 0.287 38 .97 1.924 1.700 1.411 0.513 0.289 56 .4

9 1.879 1.704 1.401 0.478 0.303 63 .5

11 2.074 1.632 1.320 0.754 0.312 41 .413 2.312 1.389 1.041 1.271 0.347 27 .315 2.514 0.611 0.442 2.071 0.169 8.116 2.514 0.611 0.442 2.071 0.169 8.1The optimum for Vadaptive is at m⋆ = 9 ( V ⋆ 

> adaptive

= 1 .704 nats, saturation 63 .5%). Vfixed 

peaks one cell earlier at m = 7. Realized adaptive gain Vadaptive − Vfixed peaks at m = 13 (0 .347 nats). And the ignorance gap E[IG] peaks at the two extremes m = 1 (narrow) and m = 16 (isotropic), far from any Vadaptive or Vfixed maximum. 17 6.4 Three-way comparison: EVPI picks the wrong geometry 

Top-hat three-way comparison. 

c E[IG] Vadaptive Vfixed realized sat. top-hat m = 1 (narrow extreme) 2.081 0.619 0.499 0.121 5.8% top-hat m = 16 (isotropic extreme) 2.071 0.611 0.442 0.169 8.1% top-hat m = 9 (optimum) 0.478 1.704 1.401 0.303 63 .5%The optimum m⋆ = 9 dominates both extremes on every actionable column: Vadaptive ,

Vfixed , realized gain, and saturation. The only column on which it is not best is E[IG], where both extremes beat it by a factor of four. An EVPI-only geometry selection would reject m⋆ = 9 in favor of either m = 1 or m = 16, both of which realize Vadaptive 

that is nearly three times worse. Quantitatively, Vadaptive (m = 9) /V adaptive (m = 1) = 1.704 /0.619 ≈ 2.75: the EVPI-argmax geometry is strictly suboptimal in attainable adaptive value by a factor of ∼ 2.75 × at this problem size. The same observation underwrites the conceptual claim of Section 3: arg max c E[IG]( c)̸ =arg max c Vadaptive (c), the disagreement is operationally large, and only the full joint solve picks the right geometry. 

6.5 Optimal adaptive policy structure 

The DP-optimal policy tree reveals structure beyond what the scalar values expose. In the wide (m = 8) regime, the depth-2 head of the tree is: history action 

∅ cell 1 

y1 = 0 (miss) cell 4 

y1 = 1 (detect) cell 13 A detection at cell 1 (which covers cells {14 , 15 , 16 , 1, 2, 3, 4}) narrows the support to the upper ring half; step 2 at cell 13 (covering {10 , . . . , 16 }) bisects that half. This is binary search conditioned on the observation, the hallmark of adaptive value that fixed schedules cannot replicate. 

# 7 Case Study B: Superconducting-qubit flux sensor (exact DP, continuous state, ΦVar )

Case Study A is discrete-state and has no natural MSE metric; here we take the same exact-DP machinery to a continuous-state problem whose deployment metric is Bayesian MSE, and compare joint-DP co-design against the joint Bayesian Cram´ er–Rao fixed-schedule baseline that dominates the classical Fisher-information literature for scalar estimation. Joint-DP reduces deployed MSE by 11 .3× at z = +132 σ. Figure 1 (right) shows the sensor geometry and the adaptive Ramsey sequences. 

7.1 Problem setup 

We consider the frequency-tunable transmon flux sensor of Danilin, Nugent & Weides [44]. The unknown is the external magnetic flux x = Φ ext threading a SQUID loop, with prior Φ ext ∼

Uniform[0 , ϕ max Φ0] at ϕmax = 0 .1, where Φ 0 = h/ (2 e) is the superconducting flux quantum 18 (the rationale for this operating point is discussed in §7.6); equivalently, in dimensionless flux 

ϕ ≡ Φext /Φ0, the prior is ϕ ∼ Uniform[0 , ϕ max ]. Ramsey interferometry returns a Bernoulli outcome with likelihood 

p(y = 1 | x, τ ; c) = 12 + 12 th( x, c) e−A(x,c)τ −B(x,c)2τ 2

cos[∆ ω(x, c)τ ], (28) with all noise rates ( A, B) and spectral coefficients (∆ ω) closed-form in the 7-dimensional para-metric geometry c = ( f max  

> q

, E C /h, κ, ∆qr , T, A Φ, A Ic ) (see [44] for the complete rate formulas). The action at epoch k is the pair sk = ( τk, n k), with τk the Ramsey delay and nk the number of repetitions (yielding a Binomial( nk, p ) observation). 

Reward. Φ = Φ Var , motivated by the Bayesian MSE alignment discussed in Section 2.3. 

7.2 Exact Bellman DP via count-statistic memoization 

The Ramsey likelihood is invariant under permutation of measurements at the same ( τ, n ) tuple. Consequently the belief bk at step k is a sufficient statistic of the cumulative counts ( Nj , M j )Jj=1 

where Nj is the total number of measurements made at delay τj across all past epochs and Mj

the count of y = 1 outcomes. This makes the belief state a finite tuple of integers, and the Bellman DP admits exact memoization on a count-tuple hash table. At K = 4, J = 10 (log-spaced τ in [10 , 320] ns), L = 2 (repetitions n ∈ { 1, 10 }), KΦ = 256 (belief grid resolution), the memo contains on the order of 10 7 nodes and the DP completes in minutes on a single thread. 

7.3 Joint-DP co-design 

We run the policy iteration of Section 4 with outer Adam updates at learning rate 5 × 10 −4

and periodic policy reoptimization, on a physically realistic restricted geometry box ( f max  

> q

∈

[3 , 12] GHz, EC /h ∈ [0 .15 , 0.4] GHz, κ ∈ [0 .1, 5] MHz, ∆ qr ∈ [0 .8, 5] GHz), with the noise amplitudes and temperature held fixed at the operating values reported in [44] ( AΦ = AIc =10 −6, T = 40 mK). The outer Adam rescales each c component by its box width before stepping, which is necessary because the raw natural-unit ranges of the 7 components span 14 orders of magnitude. The best c encountered over the trajectory is 

c⋆ 

> 1

≈ (f max  

> q

= 8 .99 GHz , E C /h = 0 .254 GHz , κ = 0 .47 MHz , ∆qr = 2 .02 GHz) , (29) with Vadaptive (c⋆

> 1

) = −E[Var( x | bK )] = −7.49 × 10 −5 Φ20.

7.4 Joint PCRB baseline 

The Bayesian Cram´ er–Rao bound [59, 60] gives an alternative joint optimization: (c⋆

> 2

, s⋆

> 2

) = arg max 

> c,s1: K

log JP (s1: K , c), JP = J0 + Ex

hPKk=1 nk JF (x, τ k, c)

i

, (30) where JF (x, τ, c) = ( ∂p/∂ x)2/[p(1 − p)] is the per-shot scalar Fisher information. This is a 

single-level optimization over c and a fixed schedule s1: K (no Bellman, no belief tree). Running the analogous outer Adam with inner schedule enumeration at per-iteration reoptimization gives: 

c⋆ 

> 2

≈ (f max  

> q

= 9 .62 GHz , E C /h = 0 .272 GHz , κ = 0 .10 MHz , ∆qr = 3 .20 GHz) , (31) with s⋆ 

> 2

= ( τ10 , n 2)4 = (320 ns , 10) 4. The PCRB-optimal geometry c⋆ 

> 2

prefers a larger qubit frequency, a larger qubit-resonator detuning, and the minimum-feasible κ, whereas the joint-DP optimum c⋆ 

> 1

settles closer to the experimental nominal value of each. The two optima differ materially inside the restricted box, so the deployed-MSE gap reported below is a full joint co-design comparison rather than a shared-geometry test of policy structure alone. 19 7.5 Deployed MSE comparison 

We deploy each design with nmc = 20 ,000 Monte-Carlo trajectories at KΦ = 256 posterior res-olution, paired common-seed xtrue draws. Each deployment uses the posterior-mean estimator. Results: quantity value MSE 1 (joint DP) (7 .49 ± 0.24) × 10 −5 Φ20

MSE 2 (PCRB baseline) (8 .43 ± 0.05) × 10 −4 Φ20

J−1 

> P

(c⋆

> 2

, s⋆

> 2

) (CRB) 1.03 × 10 −9 Φ20

ratio MSE 2/MSE 1 11 .27 

z-score +132 σ

Joint-DP (c⋆

> 1

, π ⋆ 

> 1

) beats the PCRB baseline (c⋆

> 2

, s⋆

> 2

) by 11 .3× on deployed Bayesian MSE at K = 4 , at z = +132 σ.

The CRB lower bound J−1 

> P

≈ 10 −9 is five-to-six orders of magnitude below both empirical MSEs, a reminder that the asymptotic CRB is loose for finite-horizon biased posterior-mean estimators on bounded-support priors [85, 112]. Neither design approaches the CRB lower bound; the comparison between the two is nevertheless clean and statistically decisive. 

7.6 Why ϕmax = 0 .1: aliasing, horizon, and PCRB validity 

The prior width ϕmax interacts with the tractable horizon K = 4 through Ramsey aliasing. The likelihood (28) is periodic in ∆ ω(x) τ , so a prior that spans many Ramsey fringes yields a multimodal posterior that can be disambiguated only by measurements at sufficiently varied τ ;to leading order, at least log 2(Nfringes ) distinct delays are required. At ϕmax → Φ0/2 (uninfor-mative prior) the support spans many fringes and four epochs are too few for either a fixed or an adaptive schedule to resolve them; both joint-DP and joint-PCRB converge to comparable aliasing-floor MSE and the adaptive margin shrinks. At ϕmax well below this the prior is nar-row enough that aliasing is essentially absent, both methods operate far below the floor, and the joint-DP margin grows rapidly. Separately, the PCRB is a local/asymptotic bound that elides posterior multimodality, so at large ϕmax it is mis-specified as a baseline: the comparison would be doubly uninformative (joint-DP K-limited, joint-PCRB outside its regime of valid-ity). Choosing ϕmax = 0 .1 sits just inside the regime where joint-DP’s adaptive finesse becomes observable at K = 4 while keeping the PCRB baseline a valid reference, a representative rather than extremal test of co-design quality. 

# 8 Case Study C: Photonic metasensor (rung-4 surrogate, 10 5-dim continuous c, ΦVar )

The two preceding case studies used exact Bellman DP. The photonic case study operates on a ∼

10 5-pixel permittivity landscape where exact DP is infeasible, and demonstrates the relaxation-hierarchy rung 4: deployment-aligned outer reward Φ Var , Gaussian-posterior belief updates via an extended Kalman filter, a Fisher-trace inner-policy surrogate s⋆k = arg max s tr Jk( ¯ xk, s, c)at the EKF posterior mean, and implicit-function-theorem differentiation through that inner argmax. 

8.1 Problem setup 

The device is a 2 ×2 lattice of identical 2D cross-waveguide scatterers, each cell a four-port cross with a central 300 × 300-pixel permittivity design region; all four cells share the same inverse-20 Figure 2: Case Study C overview. A 2 × 2 lattice of identical cross-waveguide scatterers (cells 1–4), each carrying the same inverse-designed binary-permittivity pattern in its central design region. Two coherent broadband light pulses enter at the left edge: an action pulse carrying the adaptive input phases sk = ( ϕ(k)1 , ϕ (k)2 ) at epoch k, and a fixed-phase reference pulse. External stimulus fields (e.g., electrostatic) acting on the cells induce per-cell refractive-index shifts ∆ n1, . . . , ∆n4, which constitute the hidden state x = vec(∆ n) ∈ R4 to be estimated. The intensity overlays inside each cell visualize the electromagnetic near-field response under one such probe. Port powers measured at the 8 external output ports form the observation 

yk ∈ R8; an EKF reconstructs x across successive broadband measurement steps, with the adaptive policy re-selecting sk+1 from x’s posterior after each step. designed geometry, giving c ∈ [0 , 1] 300 ×300 (equivalently c ∈ R90 ,000 ) as the outer optimization variable. The unknown state x = vec(∆ n) ∈ R4 is the vector of per-cell refractive-index perturbations to be estimated. At each of Ktrain = 3 measurement epochs during co-design the sensor chooses a pair of input phases sk = ( ϕ(k)1 , ϕ (k)2 ) applied to two of the lattice’s external input ports as coherent broadband drives across 20 frequencies; the observations are the yk ∈ R8

broadband port powers measured at the lattice’s 8 external output ports, with additive Gaussian noise. 

Reward. Φ = Φ Var = −Var( x | bK ), with the EKF supplying the terminal Gaussian pos-terior bK ≈ N ( ¯ xK , ΣK ) so that the deployed Bayesian MSE evaluates to E tr Σ K . The in-tractable Bellman inner arg max π is replaced by the rung-4 surrogate of §5: at each epoch the prescribed policy maximizes the Bayesian Fisher-information trace at the posterior mean, 

s⋆k = arg max s tr Jk( ¯ xk, s, c), in closed form under the Gaussian parametrization. 

8.2 Physics and differentiability 

The forward model is a 2D finite-difference frequency-domain (FDFD) Maxwell solver applied to a single unit cell, which returns one 4 × 4 S-matrix per frequency on a broadband sampling grid of 20 frequencies. We Taylor-expand the per-cell S-matrix to second order in the local refractive-index perturbation ∆ n,

S(∆ n) ≈ S0 + ∂S ∂n ∆n + 12

∂2S∂n 2 ∆n2, (32) 21 computed with a single FDFD solve per frequency and evaluated independently at each of the four cells with its own ∆ ni. The four cells are wired together by the port-connection equations to assemble the lattice’s 8-port S-matrix; the 8 external-port powers, summed over the 20 frequencies against a Gaussian spectral weight, form the observation y ∈ R8. The Jacobian 

∂y/∂ c passes through the cell S-matrix coefficients via the FDFD adjoint method [97, 98]. 

8.3 Joint optimization 

The outer loop is the policy iteration of Section 4. At each c and epoch k the inner Fisher-trace optimization s⋆k(bk; c) = arg max s tr Jk( ¯ xk, s, c) is solved by grid search followed by L-BFGS refinement. Its derivative with respect to c, which the chain rule requires, is computed in closed form from the implicit function theorem applied at the inner argmax, avoiding nested automatic differentiation. To produce a geometry compatible with lithographic fabrication we apply a density filter to c (convolving with a radius-R kernel to enforce a minimum feature size) and then a tanh threshold projection with sharpness parameter β [113–116]. During optimization β

is increased along a continuation schedule 16 → 32 → 64 → 128 → 256 so that the projection gradually sharpens from a smooth blur to a near-binary mask. 

8.4 Optimized binary design and loss trajectory 

Figure 3: Final optimized binary permittivity of the 300 ×300 design region (main panel). Inset: joint-DP loss trajectory from a fully random initialization through the full co-design; light blue, per-iteration loss; red, 20-iteration moving average; dashed, the transition into the filter-constrained projection phase. 

8.5 Monte-Carlo EKF deployment 

Deploying the optimized binary design with the EKF reconstruction and fresh perturbation draws (200 episodes, Kdeploy = 10 EKF steps per episode): metric optimized random initial ratio EKF relative error (10 steps) 0.97% 120% 123 × better BFIM trace (step 1) 2.50 × 10 13 4.01 × 10 10 622 ×

Episode loss (10 steps) 3.5 × 10 −4 6.5 1.84 × 10 4×

22 The optimized geometry reduces posterior-mean relative error from 120% (unoptimized) to 0.97% (optimized) after ten EKF measurement steps, a 123 × improvement, while delivering 622 × more Fisher information per measurement. After a single broadband measurement the EKF reduces relative error from 184% (prior) to 3 .4% (posterior), essentially solving the esti-mation problem with one observation. These ratios are enormous because the problem starts ill-conditioned: a random permittivity distribution produces a nearly non-invertible S-matrix. The improvement illustrates what high-dimensional c-optimization buys when jointly designed with the EKF reconstruction. 

8.6 Feasibility discussion 

At the design frequency λ = 1550 nm, the shot-noise-limited detection threshold we report corresponds to ∼ 64 μW per port at 1 μs integration, within the operating range of standard telecom lasers. The final binary permittivity distribution is smooth at the density-filter length scale ( R = 5 pixels ≈ 200 nm feature size at 5-nm/pixel lattice) and compatible with electron-beam lithography. 

# 9 Discussion 

9.1 The common shape of the adaptive advantage 

Across the three case studies the adaptive policy’s margin over the best fixed-schedule baseline comes from one move: redirecting the next measurement based on whichever partition of the state space the current data has already ruled out. In Case A, a detection at cell 1 halves the ring’s support before step 2 targets cell 13. In Case B, the first epoch at τ ≈ 22 ns collapses the multimodal posterior before later epochs switch to τ = 320 ns to sharpen within a single fringe; the PCRB fixed schedule commits to τ = 320 ns from step 1 and cannot undo the aliasing. In Case C, each new pair of probe phases is re-aligned with the largest remaining eigenvector of the EKF posterior covariance, so that successive measurements shrink the least-constrained direction of the state. Prior-averaged information criteria, whether mutual information, Fisher information, or EVPI, marginalize over the data before committing an action, so the geometry they recommend is tuned to whichever schedule is best on average rather than best conditionally. The joint-DP margin is therefore not a numerical artifact of any particular problem: it is the signature of a hardware operating point chosen in anticipation of a conditional policy, and hardware chosen without that anticipation cannot, in general, recover it by attaching an adaptive policy after the fact. 

9.2 Why the PCRB baseline loses even when it co-optimizes c

The 11 .3× Case B margin sharpens this general statement. Both c⋆ 

> 1

and c⋆ 

> 2

are genuine numerical optima of their respective objectives inside the same physical box; nothing prevents the PCRB optimizer from landing on c⋆ 

> 1

if that geometry gave it more Fisher information. It lands on a different point c⋆ 

> 2

and still produces MSE an order of magnitude worse, because the two objectives reward different physical behavior. The Fisher information at long Ramsey delay is high because one long measurement gives sharp local phase resolution, but at prior width 

ϕmax = 0 .1 Φ 0 the prior support spans many Ramsey fringes and the single-level Fisher criterion has no machinery for disambiguating which fringe the true Φ ext lies on. The Bellman-optimal policy does have that machinery: a short-τ first epoch reduces the multimodal posterior to a unimodal one, and the remaining epochs exploit long-τ resolution within the selected fringe. The PCRB-optimal c is therefore tuned to a schedule the adaptive policy would never deploy; and because the coherence and drive parameters that favor long-τ fringe visibility differ from those that favor short-τ aliasing-breaking, the two optimizers converge to different geometries entirely. 23 The belief-conditional action selection is not a refinement one can bolt on afterwards, which is what makes co-design, rather than serial “pick c then pick π” optimization, the minimum principled procedure. 

9.3 What the EVPI is still good for 

We advocate demoting the EVPI from a design target to a workflow tool. Three concrete roles survive: 1. A pre-screen when the full joint DP is computationally prohibitive but schedule enumera-tion remains tractable. E[IG]( c) requires only Voracle and Vfixed , both computable by direct enumeration of candidate schedules, bypassing the backward-in-time value iteration that 

Vadaptive demands; the cheapness of EVPI is inherited from the cheapness of those enumer-ations (small discrete action sets or low-dimensional continuous actions on a reasonable grid), and evaporates when the schedule space is large enough that enumeration itself becomes the bottleneck. 2. A post-hoc diagnostic showing how much adaptive headroom is available at the joint-optimum geometry. Small E[IG]( c⋆) means the joint-optimum is close to the oracle ceiling; large values indicate remaining value from longer horizons, richer action sets, or tighter priors. 3. An interpretive lens on the shape of the c-landscape. The non-coincidence of arg max E[IG] and arg max Vadaptive encodes physics: extreme geometries have large ceilings that no pol-icy can reach; interior geometries have smaller ceilings that adaptive policies can consume a larger fraction of. 

9.4 Limitations 

• Horizon. Case Studies A and B are at small horizon ( K = 4) where exact DP is tractable. At larger horizons the Bellman memoization table blows up, forcing descent down rungs 2–4 of the hierarchy. The Gaussian-posterior EKF surrogate (rung 4) extrapolates to arbitrary K; its accuracy relative to exact DP at moderate K is an open question. 

• Parametric c in Case B. Case Study B’s 7-dimensional geometry is the closed-form-parametrized subset of the transmon circuit, not the full layout design space. Extending c

to include SQUID-loop mutual inductances via analytically differentiable Biot–Savart [117] is architecturally supported and expected to give joint-DP further advantage; this is on-going work. 

• Finite sample MSE bound. The Bayesian CRB 1 /J P is an asymptotic lower bound. For biased Bayesian estimators on bounded priors at small K the bound is loose by or-ders of magnitude (Case Study B: ∼ 10 5–10 6× gap between the CRB and the deployed MSE of either design). Tighter finite-sample bounds such as the Weiss–Weinstein [118], Bobrovsky–Zakai, and Ziv–Zakai [86] bounds would be more informative anchors; inte-grating them into the framework is a natural next step. 

• Continuous-action Bellman. The count-statistic memoization exploited in Case Study B breaks for continuous actions. Practical paths include fine discretization (as we did), Gaussian belief approximations (rung 4), or particle-filter DP. A full continuous-action Bellman for the scqubit problem at K ≥ 4 would require one of these paths; we presented the discretization path as the cheapest. 

9.5 Open directions: dynamical state 

All three case studies treat the unknown x as static over the K-step measurement horizon. The natural next frontier is dynamical x: targets that move, circuit parameters that drift, fields that fluctuate across the sensor integration window. Three things change when the state 24 evolves. First, the belief filter becomes a recursive predict-correct step rather than a single-shot posterior update, and for non-Gaussian posteriors the inference primitive has to move from grids and EKFs to particle filters. Second, the Bellman backup has to anticipate state transitions over the K steps, not just measurement accumulation, so the dynamics time scale interacts with the horizon and with each rung’s coarsening of the belief summary. Third, when the action space is high-dimensional or continuous (beam angles, integration times, waveform parameters) the prescribed closed-form arg max of §5 becomes unwieldy and a neural-network policy becomes the natural inner solver, which re-introduces the hardware-light pathology flagged at the branch point of the cascade. The sharp-max differentiable-DP outer gradient survives this transition unchanged; what does not survive is the exactness of the inner solve, and the clean cascade of rungs 1–4 is replaced by a spectrum of training regimes whose geometry gradients depend on policy capacity, dynamics time scale, and filter fidelity together. We pursue this extension in a companion line of work on real-time tracking of a nonlinear dynamical system with a jointly-designed physical sensor and a learned measurement policy; full treatment is deferred to a future paper. The present work establishes the static-state foundation on which that extension stands. 

# 10 Conclusion 

For any sensor whose physical hardware is designed once but whose measurement policy runs for the lifetime of the device, programmable metasurfaces, cognitive radars, frequency-tunable quantum sensors, reconfigurable photonic-integrated meshes, joint optimization of geometry and policy is the minimum principled procedure. Sharp-max differentiable dynamic programming, with the envelope theorem as the exactness certificate, makes the joint optimization tractable; a principled relaxation hierarchy makes it portable across scales; a family of compatible scalar rewards makes it applicable across communities. The Expected Value of Perfect Information, classical and instructive, serves as a diagnostic: its argmax disagrees with the joint-DP argmax by factors of ∼ 3× in attainable adaptive value. The deployment-aligned comparison of joint-DP and Bayesian-CRB co-design on a superconducting-qubit flux sensor gives the operational headline: an 11 .3× reduction in Bayesian MSE at z = +132 σ, with both hardware geometries numerically co-optimized under their respective objectives. 

Code and data. Data and code underlying the results presented in this paper may be ob-tained from the authors upon reasonable request. 

Acknowledgments. This work is supported by U. S. Army Research Office (award numbers W911NF2410390 and W911NF2510113). 

# References 

[1] John D. Joannopoulos, Steven G. Johnson, Joshua N. Winn, and Robert D. Meade. 

Photonic Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2nd edition, 2008. [2] Nanfang Yu and Federico Capasso. Flat optics with designer metasurfaces. Nature Ma-terials , 13:139–150, 2014. doi: 10.1038/nmat3839. [3] Sean Molesky, Zin Lin, Alexander Y. Piggott, Weiliang Jin, Jelena Vuckovic, and Ale-jandro W. Rodriguez. Inverse design in nanophotonics. Nature Photonics , 12:659–670, 2018. 25 [4] Jakob S. Jensen and Ole Sigmund. Topology optimization for nano-photonics. Laser & Photonics Reviews , 5:308–321, 2011. doi: 10.1002/lpor.201000014. [5] Jiaqi Jiang, Mingkun Chen, and Jonathan A. Fan. Deep neural networks for the evaluation and design of photonic devices. Nature Reviews Materials , 6:679–700, 2021. doi: 10.1038/ s41578-020-00260-1. [6] Rasmus E. Christiansen and Ole Sigmund. Inverse design in photonics by topology opti-mization: Tutorial. Journal of the Optical Society of America B , 38:496–509, 2021. doi: 10.1364/JOSAB.406048. [7] Zin Lin, Victor Liu, Rapha¨ el Pestourie, and Steven G. Johnson. Topology optimization of freeform large-area metasurfaces. Optics Express , 27:15765–15775, 2019. [8] Steven A. Cummer, Johan Christensen, and Andrea Al` u. Controlling sound with acoustic metamaterials. Nature Reviews Materials , 1:16001, 2016. doi: 10.1038/natrevmats.2016.1. [9] Tomoki Ozawa, Hannah M. Price, Alberto Amo, Nathan Goldman, Mohammad Hafezi, Ling Lu, Mikael C. Rechtsman, David Schuster, Jonathan Simon, Oded Zilberberg, and Iacopo Carusotto. Topological photonics. Reviews of Modern Physics , 91:015006, 2019. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.91.015006. [10] Peter Vukusic and J. Roy Sambles. Photonic structures in biology. Nature , 424:852–855, 2003. doi: 10.1038/nature01941. [11] Owen D. Miller, Yiwen Yang, Steven G. Johnson, et al. Fundamental limits to optical response in absorptive systems. Optics Express , 24:3329–3364, 2016. [12] Hyungki Shim, Zeyu Kuang, Zin Lin, and Owen D. Miller. Fundamental limits to multi-functional and tunable nanophotonic response. Nanophotonics , 13(12):2107–2116, 2024. doi: 10.1515/nanoph-2023-0630. [13] Vincent Sitzmann, Steven Diamond, Yifan Peng, Xiong Dun, Stephen Boyd, Wolfgang Heidrich, Felix Heide, and Gordon Wetzstein. End-to-end optimization of optics and image processing for achromatic extended depth of field and super-resolution imaging. 

ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) , 2018. [14] Julie Chang and Gordon Wetzstein. Deep optics for monocular depth estimation and 3d object detection. ICCV , 2019. [15] Christopher A. Metzler, Hayato Ikoma, Yifan Peng, and Gordon Wetzstein. Deep optics for single-shot high-dynamic-range imaging. CVPR , 2020. [16] Ethan Tseng, Shane Colburn, James Whitehead, Luocheng Huang, Seung-Hwan Baek, Arka Majumdar, and Felix Heide. Neural nano-optics for high-quality thin lens imaging. 

Nature Communications , 2021. [17] Michael R. Kellman, Emrah Bostan, Nicole A. Repina, and Laura Waller. Physics-based learned design: optimized coded-illumination for quantitative phase imaging. IEEE Trans-actions on Computational Imaging , 5:344–353, 2019. [18] Felix Heide, Markus Steinberger, Yun-Ta Tsai, Mushfiqur Rouf, Dawid Pajak, Dikpal Reddy, Orazio Gallo, Jing Liu, Wolfgang Heidrich, Karen Egiazarian, Jan Kautz, and Kari Pulli. FlexISP: A flexible camera image processing framework. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH Asia) , 2014. 26 [19] Nick Antipa, Grace Kuo, Reinhard Heckel, Ben Mildenhall, Emrah Bostan, Ren Ng, and Laura Waller. DiffuserCam: lensless single-exposure 3d imaging. Optica , 2018. [20] Gaurav Arya, William F. Li, Charles Roques-Carmes, Marin Soljaˇ ci´ c, Steven G. John-son, and Zin Lin. End-to-end optimization of metasurfaces for imaging with compressed sensing. ACS Photonics , 11(5):2077–2087, 2024. doi: 10.1021/acsphotonics.4c00259. [21] Zin Lin, Charles Roques-Carmes, Rapha¨ el Pestourie, Marin Soljaˇ ci´ c, Arka Majumdar, and Steven G. Johnson. End-to-end nanophotonic inverse design for imaging and polarimetry. 

Nanophotonics , 10:1177–1187, 2021. [22] Lianlin Li, Tie Jun Cui, Wei Ji, Shuo Liu, Jun Ding, Xiang Wan, Yun Bo Li, Menghua Jiang, Cheng-Wei Qiu, and Shuang Zhang. Machine-learning reprogrammable metasurface imager. Nature Communications , 10:1082, 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-09103-2. [23] Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence , 101:99–134, 1998. [24] Richard D. Smallwood and Edward J. Sondik. The optimal control of partially observable Markov processes over a finite horizon. Operations Research , 21(5):1071–1088, 1973. [25] Edward J. Sondik. The optimal control of partially observable Markov processes . PhD thesis, Stanford University, 1971. [26] Chris Kreucher, Keith Kastella, and Alfred O. Hero, III. Sensor management using an active sensing approach. Signal Processing , 85(3):607–624, 2005. [27] Alfred O. Hero and Douglas Cochran. Sensor management: Past, present, and future. 

IEEE Sensors Journal , 11(12):3064–3075, 2011. [28] A. O. Hero, D. A. Casta˜ n´ on, D. Cochran, and K. Kastella, editors. Foundations and Applications of Sensor Management . Springer, 2008. [29] Yuxin Chen and Andreas Krause. Near-optimal bayesian active learning with correlated and noisy tests. In AISTATS , 2017. [30] Andreas Krause and Carlos Guestrin. Near-optimal nonmyopic value of information in graphical models. In UAI , 2005. [31] D. V. Lindley. On a measure of the information provided by an experiment. Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 27(4):986–1005, 1956. [32] Xun Huan and Youssef M. Marzouk. Sequential Bayesian optimal experimental design via approximate dynamic programming. arXiv:1604.08320 , 2016. [33] Wanggang Shen and Xun Huan. Bayesian sequential optimal experimental design for nonlinear models using policy gradient reinforcement learning. arXiv:2110.15335 , 2023. [34] Alen Alexanderian. Optimal experimental design for infinite-dimensional Bayesian inverse problems governed by PDEs: a review. Acta Numerica , 2021. [35] Kathryn Chaloner and Isabella Verdinelli. Bayesian experimental design: A review. Sta-tistical Science , 10(3):273–304, 1995. [36] Kristine L. Bell, Chris J. Baker, Graeme E. Smith, Joel T. Johnson, and Muralidhar Rangaswamy. Cognitive radar framework for target detection and tracking. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing , 2015. 27 [37] Simon Haykin. Cognitive radar: a way of the future. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine ,23:30–40, 2006. [38] Maria S. Greco, Fulvio Gini, Pietro Stinco, and Kristine L. Bell. Cognitive radars: On the road to reality. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 2018. [39] Imad Bouhou, Stefano Fortunati, Leila Gharsalli, and Alexandre Renaux. POMDP-driven cognitive massive MIMO radar: Joint target detection-tracking in unknown disturbances. 

IEEE Transactions on Radar Systems , 2025. arXiv:2410.17967. [40] Vittorio Giovannetti, Seth Lloyd, and Lorenzo Maccone. Quantum metrology. Physical Review Letters , 96:010401, 2006. [41] Samuel L. Braunstein and Carlton M. Caves. Statistical distance and the geometry of quantum states. Physical Review Letters , 72:3439–3443, 1994. [42] Matteo G. A. Paris. Quantum estimation for quantum technology. International Journal of Quantum Information , 7:125–137, 2009. [43] Carlton M. Caves. Quantum-mechanical noise in an interferometer. Physical Review D ,23:1693–1708, 1981. [44] Sergey Danilin, Nicholas Nugent, and Martin Weides. Tunable transmon qubit as a flux sensor: joint device-protocol optimization. arXiv:2211.08344v4 , 2024. [45] A. Yu. Kitaev. Quantum measurements and the Abelian stabilizer problem. arXiv:quant-ph/9511026 , 1995. [46] B. Braverman, A. Kawasaki, E. Pedrozo-Pe˜ nafiel, S. Colombo, C. Shu, Z. Li, E. Mendez, M. Yamoah, L. Salvi, D. Akamatsu, et al. Near-unitary spin squeezing in 171 yb. Physical Review Letters , 122:223203, 2019. [47] Okan Yurduseven, Jonah N. Gollub, Daniel L. Marks, and David R. Smith. Printed aperiodic cavity for computational and microwave imaging. IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters , 2017. [48] Mohammadreza F. Imani, Jonah N. Gollub, Okan Yurduseven, Aaron V. Diebold, Michael Boyarsky, Thomas Fromenteze, Laura Pulido-Mancera, Timothy Sleasman, and David R. Smith. Review of metasurface antennas for computational microwave imaging. IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation , 2020. [49] Stefano Pirandola, Bhaskar Roy Bardhan, Tobias Gehring, Christian Weedbrook, and Seth Lloyd. Advances in photonic quantum sensing. Nature Photonics , 12:724–733, 2018. doi: 10.1038/s41566-018-0301-6. [50] C. L. Degen, F. Reinhard, and P. Cappellaro. Quantum sensing. Reviews of Modern Physics , 89:035002, 2017. [51] Harald Cram´ er. Mathematical Methods of Statistics . Princeton University Press, 1946. [52] C. R. Rao. Information and the accuracy attainable in the estimation of statistical pa-rameters. Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical Society , 37:81–91, 1945. [53] Paul Milgrom and Ilya Segal. Envelope theorems for arbitrary choice sets. Econometrica ,70(2):583–601, 2002. [54] Lawrence M. Benveniste and Jose A. Scheinkman. On the differentiability of the value function in dynamic models of economics. Econometrica , 47(3):727–732, 1979. 28 [55] Arthur Mensch and Mathieu Blondel. Differentiable dynamic programming for structured prediction and attention. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2018. [56] Brandon Amos, Ivan D. Jimenez Rodriguez, Jacob Sacks, Byron Boots, and J. Zico Kolter. Differentiable MPC for end-to-end planning and control. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2018. [57] Justin Domke. Generic methods for optimization-based modeling. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) , 2012. [58] Mathieu Blondel, Quentin Berthet, Marco Cuturi, Roy Frostig, Stephan Hoyer, Felipe Llinares-L´ opez, Fabian Pedregosa, and Jean-Philippe Vert. Efficient and modular implicit differentiation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [59] Harry L. Van Trees and Kristine L. Bell. Bayesian Bounds for Parameter Estimation and Nonlinear Filtering/Tracking . Wiley-IEEE Press, 2007. [60] Petr Tichavsk´ y, Carlos H. Muravchik, and Arye Nehorai. Posterior Cram´ er–Rao bounds for discrete-time nonlinear filtering. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , 46(5):1386– 1396, 1998. [61] Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming . Princeton University Press, 1957. [62] Michael R. Kellman, Emrah Bostan, Michael Chen, and Laura Waller. Data-driven design for Fourier ptychographic microscopy. Optica , 7:1075–1082, 2020. [63] Alex Muthumbi, Amey Chaware, Kangwook Kim, Kevin C. Kim, Jaebum Park, Michael Chen, Laura Waller, and Roarke Horstmeyer. Learned sensing: jointly optimized micro-scope hardware for accurate image classification. Biomedical Optics Express , 10:6351– 6369, 2019. [64] Emrah Bostan, Reinhard Heckel, Michael Chen, Michael Kellman, and Laura Waller. Deep phase decoder: self-calibrating phase microscopy with an untrained deep neural network. Optica , 7:559–562, 2020. [65] Michael R. Kellman, Emrah Bostan, Nicole A. Repina, and Laura Waller. Physics-based learned design: Optimized coded-illumination for quantitative phase imaging. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging , 5(3):344–353, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TCI.2019. 2905434. [66] John M. Danskin. The theory of max-min, with applications. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics , 14:641–664, 1966. [67] Ronald A. Howard. Information value theory. IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics , 2(1):22–26, 1966. [68] Howard Raiffa and Robert Schlaifer. Applied Statistical Decision Theory . Harvard Busi-ness School, 1961. [69] Pengning Chao, Benjamin Strekha, others, Sean Molesky, and Alejandro W. Rodriguez. Maximum electromagnetic local density of states via material structuring: T-matrix bounds. Nature Reviews Physics , 2022. [70] Sean Molesky, Prashanth S. Venkataram, Weiliang Jin, and Alejandro W. Rodriguez. Fundamental limits to radiative heat transfer: theory. Physical Review B , 2020. 29 [71] Sean Molesky, Pengning Chao, and Alejandro W. Rodriguez. Hierarchical mean-field t-matrix bounds on photonic scattering. Physical Review Research , 2020. [72] Sean Molesky, Pengning Chao, Weiliang Jin, and Alejandro W. Rodriguez. T-operator limits on optical communication: metaoptics, computation, and input-output transforma-tions. Physical Review Research , 2022. [73] Zeyu Kuang and Owen D. Miller. Computational bounds to light-matter interactions via local conservation laws. Physical Review Letters , 2020. [74] Pengning Chao, Benjamin Strekha, Rodrick Kuate Defo, Sean Molesky, and Alejandro W. Rodriguez. Physical limits in electromagnetism. Nature Reviews Physics , 4:543–559, 2022. doi: 10.1038/s42254-022-00468-w. [75] Mats Gustafsson, Kurt Schab, Lukas Jelinek, and Miloslav Capek. Upper bounds on absorption and scattering. New Journal of Physics , 2020. [76] Kurt Schab, Lukas Jelinek, and Miloslav Capek. Radiation efficiency limits in direct antenna modulation transmitters. IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters , 19 (11):1911–1915, 2020. doi: 10.1109/LAWP.2020.3020657. [77] Sean Molesky, Pengning Chao, Weiliang Jin, and Alejandro W. Rodriguez. Global T operator bounds on electromagnetic scattering: Upper bounds on far-field cross sections. 

Physical Review Research , 2:033172, 2020. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033172. [78] Sean Molesky, Weiliang Jin, Prashanth S. Venkataram, and Alejandro W. Rodriguez. T operator bounds on angle-integrated absorption and thermal radiation for arbitrary ob-jects. Physical Review Letters , 123:257401, 2019. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.257401. [79] Prashanth S. Venkataram, Sean Molesky, Weiliang Jin, and Alejandro W. Rodriguez. Fundamental limits to radiative heat transfer: the limited role of nanostructuring in the near-field. Physical Review Letters , 2020. [80] Miloslav Capek and Lukas Jelinek. The upper bound on antenna gain and its feasibility as a sum of characteristic gains. IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation , 2023. arXiv:2302.06425. [81] Stefan Rotter and Sylvain Gigan. Light fields in complex media: Mesoscopic scattering meets wave control. Reviews of Modern Physics , 89:015005, 2017. [82] Dorian Bouchet, Stefan Rotter, and Allard P. Mosk. Maximum information states for coherent scattering measurements. Nature Physics , 17:564–568, 2021. [83] Michael Horodynski, Dorian Bouchet, and Stefan Rotter. Invariance property of the Fisher information in scattering media. Physical Review Letters , 127:233201, 2021. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.233201. [84] Hugo Defienne, Bienvenu Ndagano, Ashley Lyons, and Daniele Faccio. Polarization entanglement-enabled quantum holography. Nature Physics , 17:591–597, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41567-020-01156-1. [85] Mankei Tsang, Ranjith Nair, and Xiao-Ming Lu. Quantum theory of superresolution for two incoherent optical point sources. Physical Review X , 6:031033, 2016. [86] Mankei Tsang. Ziv–zakai error bounds for quantum parameter estimation. Physical Review Letters , 108, 2012. 30 [87] Mankei Tsang. Resolving starlight: a quantum perspective. Contemporary Physics , 2019. [88] Claude E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal , 27:379–423, 623–656, 1948. [89] Paola Sebastiani and Henry P. Wynn. Maximum entropy sampling and optimal Bayesian experimental design. J. Royal Statistical Society Series B , 62:145–157, 2000. [90] A. W. van der Vaart. Asymptotic Statistics . Cambridge University Press, 2000. [91] Natalia A. Bochkina. Bernstein–von Mises theorem and misspecified models: A review. In Denis Belomestny, Cristina Butucea, Enno Mammen, ´Eric Moulines, Markus Reiß, and Vladimir Ulyanov, editors, Foundations of Modern Statistics , volume 425 of Springer Proceedings in Mathematics & Statistics , pages 355–380. Springer, 2023. doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-031-30114-8 10. [92] Luc Pronzato and Andrej P´ azman. Design of Experiments in Nonlinear Models: Asymp-totic Normality, Optimality Criteria and Small-Sample Properties , volume 212 of Lecture Notes in Statistics . Springer, New York, 2013. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-6363-4. [93] James O. Berger. Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis . Springer, 1985. [94] Mert Pilanci and Martin J. Wainwright. Randomized sketches of convex programs with sharp guarantees. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 61(9):5096–5115, 2015. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2015.2450722. [95] Keith Kastella. Discrimination gain to optimize classification. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Part A , 1997. [96] J. Fr´ ed´ eric Bonnans and Alexander Shapiro. Perturbation Analysis of Optimization Prob-lems . Springer, 2000. [97] Tyler W. Hughes, Momchil Minkov, Ian A. D. Williamson, and Shanhui Fan. Adjoint method and inverse design for nonlinear nanophotonic devices. ACS Photonics , 2018. [98] Momchil Minkov, Ian A. D. Williamson, Lucio Claudio Andreani, Dario Gerace, Beicheng Lou, Alex Y. Song, Tyler W. Hughes, and Shanhui Fan. Inverse design of photonic crystals through automatic differentiation. ACS Photonics , 2020. [99] Navin Khaneja, Timo Reiss, Cindie Kehlet, Thomas Schulte-Herbr¨ uggen, and Steffen J. Glaser. Optimal control of coupled spin dynamics: design of NMR pulse sequences by gradient ascent algorithms. Journal of Magnetic Resonance , 2005. [100] Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine Learning , 8:229–256, 1992. [101] John Schulman, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, and Pieter Abbeel. Gradient estimation using stochastic computation graphs. In NeurIPS , 2015. [102] Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Program-ming . Wiley, 1994. [103] Dimitri P. Bertsekas and John N. Tsitsiklis. Neuro-Dynamic Programming . Athena Sci-entific, 1996. [104] David H. Jacobson and David Q. Mayne. Differential Dynamic Programming . American Elsevier Publishing Co., New York, 1970. 31 [105] Yuval Tassa, Tom Erez, and Emanuel Todorov. Synthesis and stabilization of complex behaviors through online trajectory optimization. In IROS , 2012. [106] David Silver and Joel Veness. Monte-Carlo planning in large POMDPs. In NIPS , 2010. [107] Adrien Cou¨ etoux, Jean-Baptiste Hoock, Nataliya Sokolovska, Olivier Teytaud, and Nico-las Bonnard. Continuous upper confidence trees. LION , 2011. [108] R´ emi Munos. From bandits to Monte-Carlo tree search: The optimistic principle applied to optimization and planning. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 2014. [109] Matthew Hausknecht and Peter Stone. Deep recurrent Q-learning for partially observable MDPs. In AAAI Fall Symposium Series , 2015. [110] Alex S. Leong, Arunselvan Ramaswamy, Daniel E. Quevedo, Holger Karl, and Ling Shi. Deep reinforcement learning for wireless sensor scheduling in cyber–physical systems. Au-tomatica , 113:108759, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.automatica.2019.108759. [111] C. C. Drovandi, J. M. McGree, and A. N. Pettitt. A sequential Monte Carlo algorithm to incorporate model uncertainty in Bayesian sequential design. J. Comp. Graphical Stat. ,23:3–24, 2014. [112] Marcel Reginatto. Physics-inspired forms of the Bayesian Cram´ er–Rao bound. Physical Review A , 102:062217, 2020. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.102.062217. [113] Fengwen Wang, Boyan S. Lazarov, and Ole Sigmund. On projection methods, conver-gence and robust formulations in topology optimization. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization , 2011. [114] Ole Sigmund. Morphology-based black and white filters for topology optimization. Struc-tural and Multidisciplinary Optimization , 2007. [115] Boyan S. Lazarov, Fengwen Wang, and Ole Sigmund. Length scale and manufacturability in density-based topology optimization. Archive of Applied Mechanics , 2016. [116] Rasmus E. Christiansen and Ole Sigmund. Compact 200 line MATLAB code for inverse design in photonics by topology optimization. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B , 2020. [117] John M. Martinis and Anthony Megrant. UCSB final report for the CSQ program: Re-view of decoherence and materials physics for superconducting qubits. Technical report, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2014. arXiv:1410.5793. [118] Anthony J. Weiss and Ehud Weinstein. A lower bound on the mean-square error in random parameter estimation. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , 31, 1985. 32 Supplement to End-to-end Co-design of Geometry, Policy and Inference 

Abstract 

This tutorial is a self-contained pedagogical companion to the joint-DP framework of the main paper. It builds the vocabulary of sequential Bayesian decision making from scratch — states, beliefs, actions, policies, rewards — states Bellman’s principle of optimality in plain language and in formulas, and works the associated backward-induction recursion in full on two representative problems: the superconducting-qubit Ramsey flux sensor (continuous state, belief compressed to a count-tuple) and the radar beam-search POMDP (discrete state, belief lives natively on a probability simplex). No prior exposure to reinforcement learning or Bellman equations is assumed; basic probability and elementary linear algebra suffice. 

# Contents 

1 What sequential decision making is, and why it needs its own theory 22 The building blocks 3

2.1 The hidden state and the prior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32.2 Actions, observations, and the likelihood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32.3 The belief and its update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32.4 The reward and the objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32.5 Why we cannot just optimize over action sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

3 Bellman’s principle of optimality 4

3.1 The principle in plain language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43.2 The principle in formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43.3 Deriving the recursion from V (π) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53.4 Why this is called backward induction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 3.5 Value iteration is a different thing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3.6 Where the computation goes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 

4 Example 1: Qubit flux sensor (continuous state, count-tuple reduction) 12 

4.1 Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 4.2 The measurement history reduces to a count-tuple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 4.3 The belief reduces automatically . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 4.4 The DP table reduces for free . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 4.5 Reachability and the size of the DP table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 4.6 Backward induction on count-tuples, in detail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 4.7 A miniature trace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 4.8 What the count-tuple reduction bought us . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 15 Example 2: Radar beam search (discrete state, finite-belief DP) 17 

5.1 Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 5.2 The belief is a probability vector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 5.3 Reachable beliefs and the DP table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 5.4 Backward induction on beliefs, in detail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 5.5 A miniature trace: one cell, one beam, K = 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 

6 What the two examples share, and where they differ 19 7 Belief augmentation: when the posterior is not enough 20 

7.1 The fix: enlarge what “belief” means . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 7.2 What augmentation costs and what it buys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 7.3 A rule of thumb for when to augment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 

8 Connection to joint hardware-policy co-design 21 

8.1 Three enabling observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 8.2 Differentiating the Bellman recursion through c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 8.3 A parallel recursion for ∂V k/∂ b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 8.4 The operational recipe: freeze the argmax, then AD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 8.5 What is c-dependent in the qubit problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 

9 Further reading and standard references 25 A On Φ0 and the reward conversion from pointwise to belief-level 26 

# 1 What sequential decision making is, and why it needs its own theory 

A single Bayesian measurement is a one-shot decision: pick an experimental setting, record a datum, update a posterior, stop. A sequential measurement is a cascade of such decisions, with the crucial feature that each action is chosen after seeing the outcomes of all previous ones. This freedom to condition is what adaptive sensing trades on: a radar that scans slowly and widely is worth less than one that points at where the previous hit suggested a target might be; a quantum sensor that always uses the same Ramsey delay wastes information that a shorter first probe could have unlocked. The mathematical awkwardness is that the optimal next action depends on whatever the pos-terior happens to look like when it is time to pick it — and the posterior depends on every previous choice and every previous outcome, which are themselves random. You cannot just “optimize over action sequences” the way you optimize over a single experimental setting, because an action se-quence that performs well against one realization of the data performs poorly against another. The right object to optimize is a policy : a rule that maps whatever you currently believe to whatever you should do next. Policies live in a much larger space than action sequences, and the infrastructure for finding the best one is dynamic programming — the subject of this tutorial. Two running examples carry the load. The first is a superconducting-qubit Ramsey flux sensor: the unknown is a continuous scalar (the external flux), each action is a pair (Ramsey delay, repe-tition count), and each outcome is a Binomial count. The second is a radar beam-search problem: the unknown is which of sixteen cells on a ring contains a target, each action is a beam pointing, and each outcome is a binary detection. Both have a four-step measurement horizon. The first forces 2us to confront a continuous-belief-space obstacle and solve it with a sufficient-statistic reduction; the second is natively finite and lets us see the DP in its rawest form. 

# 2 The building blocks 

2.1 The hidden state and the prior 

Nature draws a value x from a known prior p0(x). This value is fixed for the duration of the experiment but unknown to us. In the qubit problem x = Φ ext , a real number in some bounded interval; in the radar problem x ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , 16 }, a discrete label for which cell the target is in. 

2.2 Actions, observations, and the likelihood 

At each of K epochs we choose an action sk from an action set S and receive an observation yk

drawn from the likelihood 

yk ∼ p(y | x, sk; c), (1) where c is the physical hardware that parametrizes the likelihood. In the qubit problem the action is ( τ, n ) — a Ramsey delay and a repetition count — and the observation is the number of “1” outcomes, distributed as Binomial( n, p (x, τ ; c)). In the radar problem the action is a cell to point the beam at and the observation is a bit: 0 for miss, 1 for detection. 

2.3 The belief and its update 

After observing k epochs of data we know more about x than the prior specified. Our state of knowledge is the posterior 

bk(x) = p(x | s1: k, y1: k; c), (2) called the belief at step k. It is obtained from the prior by recursively applying Bayes’ rule: b0 = p0,and after each new measurement 

bk(x) = p(yk | x, sk; c) bk−1(x)

R p(yk | x′, sk; c) bk−1(x′) dx′ . (3) We denote the mapping defined by Equation (3) by T : bk = T (bk−1, sk, yk; c). Two facts about the belief that we will use repeatedly: 1. The belief is a sufficient statistic of the history for inference about x. Any expectation involving 

x and conditioning on the history only needs bk, not the raw ( s1: k, y1: k). 2. The belief is the natural state variable for the optimization problem. A well-posed policy is a function of the current belief, sk = π(bk−1), rather than of the raw history. 

2.4 The reward and the objective 

We need a scalar criterion to rank policies. A pointwise reward Φ( x, s1: K ; c) is a function that returns a number for each realization of the unknown state, the action sequence, and the hardware. In the qubit problem we use the negative terminal posterior variance (the Bayesian MSE of the posterior-mean estimator is its prior average); in the radar problem we use the mutual information, equivalent to the negative terminal posterior entropy. The value of a policy π is the expected reward when x is drawn from the prior, actions are chosen by π, and observations are sampled from the likelihood: 

V (π) = Ex∼p0 Ey1: K |x,π, c

Φ( x, sπ 

> 1: K

; c). (4) 3The superscript on sπ is a reminder that the action sequence is not fixed — each sk is produced by applying π to the current belief, which depends on the random trajectory ( y1: k−1). The optimal policy is any π⋆ that maximizes V (π). Solving for π⋆ is the central task of sequential decision theory. 

2.5 Why we cannot just optimize over action sequences 

If the horizon were K = 1 the optimal policy would reduce to a single best action s⋆ = arg max s Ex,y[Φ( x, s; c)] — ordinary Bayesian optimal experimental design. For K ≥ 2 two obstructions appear. First, the optimal s2 depends on y1, which is random. So there is no single “best s2”; the best choice is a 

function of y1. Second, the optimal s1 should anticipate how its outcome will shape the best s2

— in other words, s1 must account for the option value of information. Optimizing each epoch separately in a greedy or myopic fashion misses both of these couplings. The language that lets us talk about this coupling is Bellman’s. 

# 3 Bellman’s principle of optimality 

3.1 The principle in plain language 

An optimal policy has the following property. If you follow it up to some moment, reach whatever belief you happen to reach, and then ask “what is the best I can still do from here?” — the continuation of the optimal policy from that belief onward is itself an optimal policy for the sub-problem starting at that belief. Nothing the first part of the policy did will have rendered the second part suboptimal. That is almost circular, but the content is sharp: the globally optimal policy is recursive . You can assemble it by solving the sub-problems (one step before the end, then two before, then three, and so on) and gluing their optimal pieces together. 

3.2 The principle in formulas 

Fix the hardware c. Define the value-to-go function 

Vk(b) = max  

> π

EΦ0(x, bK ; c) bk = b, policy π from step k onward , (5) where Φ 0(x, bK ; c) is the reward written as a function of the unknown state and the terminal belief (for our two examples Φ 0 is −(x − ˆx)2 for the qubit, or log bK (x) − log p0(x) for the radar; see Appendix A). 

Vk(b) is the best expected score an optimal agent can still achieve if the current belief is b and there are K − k measurements still to take. Bellman’s principle says that this function satisfies the recursion 

VK (b) = Ex|b

Φ0(x, b; c), (6) 

Vk(b) = max  

> s∈S

Ey|b,s, c

Vk+1 

 T (b, s, y; c) , k = K − 1, . . . , 0. (7) Equation (6) is the terminal condition : at step K the experiment is over and the value-to-go collapses to the reward evaluated at whatever belief we have arrived at. Equation (7) is the 

Bellman backup : to know the value-to-go at belief b with K − k steps left, try every action, for each one compute the expected continuation value (which is Vk+1 evaluated at the next belief, averaged 4over the observation that the action would produce), and take the best. The argmax is the optimal action at belief b with K − k steps left: 

π⋆k(b) = arg max 

> s∈S

Ey|b,s, c

Vk+1 

 T (b, s, y; c) . (8) Reading π⋆ 

> 0

, π ⋆ 

> 1

, . . . , π ⋆K−1 off the recursion gives the globally optimal adaptive policy. 

3.3 Deriving the recursion from V (π)

We stated the recursion above. Now we derive it — starting from Equation (4), the expected reward under a fixed policy — in four steps. Each step isolates one ingredient: change of condition-ing, sufficiency of the posterior, trajectory factorization through the belief update, and Bellman’s principle applied as an interchange of max and expectation. 

Step 1: Condition on the data, not on the state. Equation (4) is a nested expectation, outer over the prior p0 and inner over the data under π. By the law of total expectation (Fubini plus the tower rule), we may swap these: 

V (π) = Ey1: K |π, c

 Ex|y1: K , c

Φ( x, sπ 

> 1: K

; c)  . (9) The outer expectation is now over how the data trajectory plays out under π; the inner expectation, over what x could have been given the observed data. 

Step 2: Replace the history-dependent integrand by a belief-dependent one. Two log-ically separate substitutions happen here, both often compressed into the single phrase “sufficient-statistic reduction.” They are worth separating, because the first is automatic and the second is a real assumption on the reward. 

(2a) Conditioning change: p(x | y1: K ) = bK . The posterior bK is by definition the condi-tional distribution of x given the measurement history: 

bK (x) = p(x | y1: K , s1: K ; c). (10) Consequently, for any integrand f (x) — no matter how chosen — 

Ex|y1: K , c

f (x) =

Z

f (x) bK (x) dx = Ex|bK

f (x). (11) This is just the definition of conditional expectation. The “history” y1: K and the “belief” bK are interchangeable as the conditioning object for any function of x. Point (2a) is therefore free. 

(2b) Function substitution: Φ( x, s1: K ; c) = Φ 0(x, bK ; c). This is the part that requires care. The original reward Φ takes the action trajectory s1: K as an argument; we want to replace that argument by the terminal belief bK . The substitution is legitimate iff Φ’s dependence on s1: K

actually factors through bK .

Definition (belief-encodable reward). We call Φ belief-encodable if there is a function Φ 0(x, b; c)such that, for every x, every c, and every pair of trajectories ( s1: K , y1: K ) and ( s′ 

> 1: K

, y′ 

> 1: K

) whose terminal beliefs agree ( bK = b′ 

> K

), Φ( x, s1: K ; c) = Φ( x, s′ 

> 1: K

; c) = Φ 0(x, bK ; c). (12) In words: any two histories that land on the same terminal posterior yield the same reward. If Equation (12) holds, Φ 0 is uniquely defined (up to values on unreachable beliefs), and substituting the rewrite into Equation (9) is valid. 5Two easy cases. The two rewards used in this tutorial both pass the test immediately, because each is a simple functional of the posterior’s shape: 

• Posterior variance ( ΦVar ). Φ( x, s1: K ; c) = −(x − ˆx(bK )) 2, where ˆ x(bK ) = E[x | bK ] is the posterior mean. The only place s1: K enters is through bK , and bK is itself the object we are substituting in. Belief-encodable with Φ 0(x, b; c) = −(x − ˆx(b)) 2. The belief-level average 

Ex|b[Φ 0] equals −Var( x | b) — the familiar Bayesian MSE expression. 

• Mutual information / log-posterior-ratio ( ΦMI ). Φ( x, s1: K ; c) = log bK (x) − log p0(x). Same argument: s1: K enters only through bK . Belief-encodable with Φ 0(x, b; c) = log b(x) −

log p0(x). The belief-level average is Ex|b[Φ 0] = KL( b∥p0); averaging further under the prior gives the mutual information I(x; y1: K ). 

A case where the test fails. The Fisher-information-aligned reward Φ log J (x, s1: K ; c) = 12 log det JN (x, s1: K ; c)has an explicit s1: K dependence through the accumulated Fisher matrix JN . Two schedules that reach the same terminal posterior bK but use different delays can have different JN values (the ma-trix accumulates a different sum) and therefore different Φ. Equation (12) fails: same bK , different Φ. Φ log J is not belief-encodable as stated. 

The repair. When Equation (12) fails, redefine the “belief” to carry whatever action-dependent accumulator the reward references — in the Fisher case, augment b → ˜b = (b, J ), so that Φlog J (x, s1: K ; c) becomes a function of ( x, ˜bK , c). The belief-encodability condition now holds on the augmented belief by construction. The cost is a larger state space for the DP; the benefit is that Step 2b works again. See §7 for the full treatment. 

Combining (2a) and (2b). Whenever the reward is belief-encodable (possibly after augmen-tation), 

Ex|y1: K , c

Φ( x, sπ 

> 1: K

; c) (2b) 

= Ex|y1: K , c

Φ0(x, bK ; c) (2a) 

= Ex|bK

Φ0(x, bK ; c). (13) The first step replaces the integrand by its belief-indexed form (2b); the second step changes the conditioning object (2a), which is automatic. Plugging into Equation (9) gives 

V (π) = Ey1: K |π, c

 Ex|bK

Φ0(x, bK ; c)  . (14) The inner bracket is a pure functional of bK ; write Φ belief 0 (b; c) := Ex|b[Φ 0(x, b; c)] to give it a name. The two examples above illustrate the two most common forms of Φ belief 0 : the posterior variance and the posterior KL to the prior. 

Step 3: Factorize the trajectory expectation through the belief update. Any realized trajectory ( y1, . . . , yK ) can be sampled one step at a time. Draw y1 from p(· | b0, π (b0); c), update the belief via b1 = T (b0, π (b0), y1; c), draw y2 from p(· | b1, π (b1); c), and so on. The outer expectation in Equation (14) thus factorizes as 

V (π) = Ey1|b0,π, c Ey2|b1,π, c · · · EyK |bK−1,π, c

 Φbelief 0 (bK ; c) . (15) Define the policy-evaluation value-to-go under a fixed policy π as 

U πk (b; c) := Eyk+1 ,..., yK |bk =b,π, c

Φbelief 0 (bK ; c). (16) Equation (15) is exactly V (π) = U π 

> 0

(p0; c). The terminal case of Equation (16) is immediate: with no remaining measurements, the expectation degenerates and 

U πK (b; c) = Φ belief 0 (b; c). (17) 6Deriving the one-step recursion. We now show how U πk−1 is determined by U πk , which is the content of the backward recursion. Start from the definition, Equation (16), at step k − 1: 

U πk−1(b; c) = Eyk ,yk+1 ,..., yK |bk−1=b,π, c

Φbelief 0 (bK ; c). (18) Apply the tower rule to split the expectation over yk from the expectation over the remaining trajectory: 

U πk−1(b; c) = Eyk |bk−1=b,π (b),c

"

Eyk+1 ,..., yK |bk−1=b,yk ,π, c

Φbelief 0 (bK ; c)| {z }

> inner expectation

#

. (19) Now examine the inner expectation. Its conditioning variables are ( bk−1 = b, yk, π, c). Given these, the belief at step k is determined: 

bk = T  b, π (b), yk; c. (20) The distribution of the remaining trajectory ( yk+1 , . . . , yK ) depends on the past only through the current belief (the sufficiency of the belief for the future dynamics, in the Markov-chain sense). So conditioning on ( bk−1 = b, yk) is equivalent — for the purpose of computing expectations of functions of the future — to conditioning on the single number bk from Equation (20): 

Eyk+1 ,..., yK |bk−1=b,yk ,π, c

 ·  = Eyk+1 ,..., yK |bk =T (b,π (b),yk ; c),π, c

 · . (21) The right-hand side of Equation (21), applied to the integrand Φ belief 0 (bK ; c), is exactly the defini-tion of U πk , Equation (16), evaluated at belief T (b, π (b), yk; c): 

Eyk+1 ,..., yK |bk =T (... ),π, c

Φbelief 0 (bK ; c) = U πk

 T (b, π (b), yk; c); c. (22) Substituting Equation (22) back into Equation (19): 

U πk−1(b; c) = Eyk |b,π (b),c

 U πk

 T (b, π (b), yk; c); c  (23) which is the policy-evaluation recursion. Shifting the index by one ( k − 1 → k, k → k + 1) and pairing with Equation (17) gives the full backward recursion for U π.

What each step used. Three ingredients, one per substitution: 1. Equation (19) uses the tower rule (iterated expectation): joint expectations factor into nested conditional expectations. Applied to separate “first step” from “rest.” 2. Equation (20) uses the deterministic belief update T : given the previous belief, action, and outcome, the next belief is fixed by Bayes’ rule with no remaining randomness. 3. Equation (21) uses the Markov property of the belief : the future trajectory’s distribution depends on the past only through the current belief. Every piece of history that is not captured in bk

drops out. No optimization is used anywhere in this derivation; Equation (23) is a valid identity for every fixed policy π. The backward recursion for U π is therefore the right-hand object to carry into Step 4, where we maximize over π to turn it into the Bellman recursion for Vk.

Step 4: Maximize over π (Bellman’s principle). We now take max over π of the policy-evaluation recursion of Step 3 to get the Bellman recursion. The step has eight substeps; we go through each one. 7Step 4a — Definition. Define 

Vk(b; c) := max  

> π

U πk (b; c), (24) the value-to-go under the optimal continuation from belief b at step k. Our goal is a recursion for 

Vk in terms of Vk+1 .

Step 4b — What goes wrong if we apply max π naively. The policy-evaluation recursion Equation (23) reads 

U πk (b; c) = Eyk+1 |b,π (b), c

 U πk+1 

 T (b, π (b), yk+1 ; c); c  . (25) If we try to take max π of both sides and naively push it through Eyk+1 , we would need max 

> π

Z

f (π, y) p(y) dy ?

=

Z

max 

> π

f (π, y) p(y) dy. (26) In general these are not equal — the max and the integral do not commute for an arbitrary family of functions indexed by π. So we have to argue why they commute in our setting. The argument has two ingredients: the decomposability of π, and the causality of the measurement. 

Step 4c — Decompose π. At step k, a policy π determines two pieces of information: 

• The action at the current belief, sk = π(b) — a single value in the action set. 

• The continuation π′ from step k + 1 onward — a function that maps future beliefs to future actions at steps k + 1 , k + 2 , . . . , K − 1. Write this as π = ( sk, π ′). Substituting into the policy-evaluation recursion, 

U πk (b; c) = Eyk+1 |b,sk , c

 U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c  , (27) where the right-hand side now depends on π only through the pair ( sk, π ′). Maximizing over π is therefore equivalent to maximizing jointly over ( sk, π ′): 

Vk(b; c) = max   

> sk∈S

max  

> π′

Eyk+1 |b,sk , c

 U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c  . (28) Fix sk for the remainder of Steps 4d–4f; we will return to the outer max sk at the end. 

Step 4d — Two observations about (yk+1 , π ′). Write the one-step expectation out as an integral: max 

> π′

Z

U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c p(yk+1 | b, sk, c) dyk+1 . (29) Two structural facts about this expression are what make the interchange go through. 

Observation 1 (causality): p(yk+1 | b, sk, c) does not depend on π′. The measurement 

yk+1 is drawn from the likelihood p(· | b, sk, c), which depends only on the current belief b and the current action sk — not on the continuation π′. Causally, yk+1 is generated before π′ is applied; the continuation policy only enters the picture once T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c) has been computed. So p(yk+1 | b, sk, c) is a π′-free non-negative weight. 

Observation 2 ( π′ is a function, not a value): π′ spans a function space. A continuation policy takes a belief and returns an action, π′ : B → S . The belief at which π′ is evaluated, 

T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c), depends on yk+1 , so different realizations of yk+1 cause π′ to be evaluated at different beliefs, where it is allowed to take different action values. The max over π′ is therefore a max over a function space , not over a single action value. 8The interchange lemma. Before completing Step 4e, we isolate the abstract identity that does the work in a stand-alone lemma. Step 4e will then be a one-line application. 

Lemma (max–integral interchange over a function space). Let Y be a measure space with non-negative measure μ, A a set (the “action space”), and g : Y × A → R a measur-able function. Let C be a class of admissible measurable functions ϕ : Y → A such that R g(y, ϕ (y)) dμ (y) is well-defined for every ϕ ∈ C . Then max 

> ϕ∈C

Z

g(y, ϕ (y)) dμ (y) = 

Z

max  

> a∈A

g(y, a ) dμ (y) (30) if and only if (i) (attainment) for each y ∈ Y , the pointwise argmax a⋆(y) := arg max a∈A g(y, a ) exists, and (ii) (admissibility) the assembled function a⋆(·) lies in C.

Proof. One inequality always holds; the other requires (i) and (ii). 

Step A (LHS ≤ RHS, unconditional). For any admissible ϕ ∈ C and any y ∈ Y ,

g(y, ϕ (y)) ≤ max  

> a∈A

g(y, a ),

by definition of the pointwise maximum. Integrating both sides against μ ≥ 0 preserves the inequality, Z

g(y, ϕ (y)) dμ (y) ≤

Z

max  

> a∈A

g(y, a ) dμ (y).

The right-hand side does not depend on ϕ, so it bounds the max over ϕ as well: max 

> ϕ∈C

Z

g(y, ϕ (y)) dμ (y) ≤

Z

max  

> a∈A

g(y, a ) dμ (y).

Step B (LHS ≥ RHS under (i) and (ii)). Define ϕ⋆ := a⋆. By (i), ϕ⋆(y) is well-defined at every y; by (ii), ϕ⋆ ∈ C . At every y,

g(y, ϕ ⋆(y)) = g(y, a ⋆(y)) = max  

> a∈A

g(y, a ),

with the first equality by definition of ϕ⋆ and the second by definition of a⋆ via (i). Integrating, 

Z

g(y, ϕ ⋆(y)) dμ (y) = 

Z

max  

> a∈A

g(y, a ) dμ (y).

Since ϕ⋆ ∈ C , the max over C is at least this value: max 

> ϕ∈C

Z

g(y, ϕ (y)) dμ (y) ≥

Z

g(y, ϕ ⋆(y)) dμ (y)=

Z

max  

> a∈A

g(y, a ) dμ (y).

Step C (combine). Step A gives LHS ≤ RHS; Step B gives LHS ≥ RHS. Together, LHS = RHS, which is Equation (30). 

Step D (strict inequality when (i) or (ii) fails). If (i) fails on a μ-positive set of y’s, the RHS integrand uses a sup rather than an attained max at those y’s, and no ϕ ∈ C can match it 9everywhere; LHS is strictly less than RHS by the sup gap. If (ii) fails — a⋆ exists pointwise but is not in C — then no ϕ ∈ C achieves the pointwise max at every y, and again LHS is strictly less than RHS. □

Operational reading of the conditions. 

• (i) Attainment says the inner max over actions is achieved (not just approximated) at each y. Holds automatically when A is finite or when A is compact and g(y, ·) is upper semicontinuous. 

• (ii) Admissibility says the pointwise-argmax function, which in general depends on y, must itself be an admissible element of C. Equivalently, C must be a function class rich enough to include all such y-dependent choices. This is satisfied when C is the class of all measurable 

ϕ : Y → A, and it fails if C is restricted — e.g., to constant functions (“fixed schedules”), in which case LHS < RHS strictly. 

Step 4e — The interchange (load-bearing step). Apply the lemma with 

• Y = the space of possible values of yk+1 ;

• measure dμ (yk+1 ) = p(yk+1 | b, sk, c) dyk+1 (the outcome distribution, non-negative and π′-free by Observation 1); 

• A = the space of admissible continuation policies from step k + 1 onward; 

• C = the class of all measurable continuation policies (equivalently, history-measurable functions from step-k + 1 beliefs to actions through step K − 1); 

• g(yk+1 , π ′) = U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c.Both conditions of the lemma are satisfied. (i) Attainment : for each yk+1 , the inner problem max π′ U π′

> k+1

(T (· · · ); c) is exactly the Bellman sub-problem at step k +1, which is attained whenever the inner action set is finite (as in all case studies in this tutorial) or compact with continuous U π′

> k+1

.

(ii) Admissibility : the pointwise argmax 

π⋆(yk+1 ) := arg max 

> π′

U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c

is a yk+1 -dependent continuation, which Observation 2 tells us is admissible (adaptive continuations can depend on the realized yk+1 ). The lemma therefore gives max 

> π′

Z

U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c p(yk+1 | b, sk, c) dyk+1 

=

Z

max  

> π′

U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c p(yk+1 | b, sk, c) dyk+1 . (31) (The weight p(yk+1 | b, sk, c) on the right is pulled out of the max π′ because it is a non-negative 

π′-free constant, exactly as Observation 1 allows. The lemma does the interchange; this factor-out is the easy follow-on step.) If the admissibility condition failed — if π′ were restricted to a non-adaptive class such as constant schedules — the lemma’s condition (ii) would be violated and the interchange would produce strict inequality. 

Step 4f — Pull p out of the inner max (easy step). By Observation 1, p(yk+1 | b, sk, c)is a π′-free non-negative constant as far as the inner max π′ is concerned. Non-negative constants commute with max: max 

> π′

 U π′ 

> k+1

p(yk+1 | b, sk, c)  = p(yk+1 | b, sk, c) max  

> π′

U π′

> k+1

. (32) 10 Substituting Equation (32) into Equation (31): max  

> π′

Eyk+1 |b,sk ,c

 U π′

> k+1

 =

Z

p(yk+1 | b, sk, c) max  

> π′

U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c dyk+1 

= Eyk+1 |b,sk ,c

 max  

> π′

U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c  . (33) 

Step 4g — Substitute the definition of Vk+1 . By Equation (24) applied at step k + 1, max  

> π′

U π′

> k+1

(b′; c) = Vk+1 (b′; c) for any belief b′. (34) Applied at b′ = T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c) inside the expectation of Equation (33): max  

> π′

U π′

> k+1

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c = Vk+1 

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c. (35) So Equation (33) becomes max  

> π′

Eyk+1 |b,sk ,c

 U π′

> k+1

 = Eyk+1 |b,sk ,c

 Vk+1 

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c  . (36) 

Step 4h — Put the outer max sk back and finish. Substituting into Equation (28): 

Vk(b; c) = max   

> sk∈S

Eyk+1 |b,sk ,c

 Vk+1 

 T (b, sk, yk+1 ; c); c  , (37) which is exactly the Bellman recursion, Equation (7). The terminal condition Equation (6) is immediate from Equation (17): at step K there is no further action to take, U πK (b; c) does not depend on π, so VK (b; c) = max π U πK (b; c) = U πK (b; c) = Ex|b[Φ 0(x, b; c)]. Evaluating the Bellman recursion at k = 0, b = p0 recovers V ⋆ = max π V (π) = V0(p0; c), closing the loop from Equation (4) to Equations (6)–(7). 

Where the adaptive-versus-fixed distinction lives. The only non-trivial move in the deriva-tion is Step 4e, the interchange of max π′ with Eyk+1 . That interchange is valid because π′ is ad-missible as a yk+1 -measurable function (Observation 2), so the pointwise argmax over yk+1 is a legitimate element of the class we are maximizing over. If we restricted π′ to a fixed schedule of actions (non-adaptive), Observation 2 would fail, max π′ would not commute with Eyk+1 , and the Bellman recursion would not simplify. What one would recover instead is the fixed-schedule value 

Vfixed , strictly smaller than Vadaptive in general. The gap between the two — the “adaptive gain” that the companion paper’s EVPI analysis quantifies — is in a precise sense the value of Step 4e being legitimate. 

3.4 Why this is called backward induction 

The only equation in the recursion that contains no unknowns is Equation (6) — the terminal one. There is no future to integrate over; only the present belief and the present reward. Once VK is a known function, Equation (7) at k = K − 1 becomes solvable, because its right-hand side only references VK . That gives VK−1, which feeds VK−2, and so on, back to V0. The value function is constructed layer by layer, from the end of the experiment to the beginning. This is “backward induction on the horizon.” 11 3.5 Value iteration is a different thing 

For completeness: Bellman’s recursion as stated here is the finite-horizon DP method. The name “value iteration” usually refers to its infinite-horizon cousin, in which one repeatedly applies a Bellman operator to a single function V on beliefs and waits for convergence to a fixed point. Convergence there is by contraction (discount factor < 1). In the finite-horizon case there is no iteration to convergence — the terminal condition anchors the recursion and K backward sweeps suffice exactly. All three case studies in the companion paper are finite-horizon, and so is this tutorial. 

3.6 Where the computation goes 

In principle, the recursion is a finite calculation: there are K layers and each layer is a max over actions of an expectation over observations. In practice the obstruction is that b is a continuous object (a probability density). You cannot tabulate Vk on the infinite space of possible beliefs. Some reduction is needed: 

• A sufficient statistic of b that lives in a finite or bounded space. (The qubit example does this.) 

• A finitely parametrized model family for b, e.g. Gaussian moments. (Case C of the paper does this; the tutorial does not pursue it.) 

• A discrete state space in which b is already a finite vector. (The radar example.) The two worked examples that follow show the first and third of these in detail. 

# 4 Example 1: Qubit flux sensor (continuous state, count-tuple reduction) 

4.1 Problem statement 

An external magnetic flux Φ ext threads a SQUID loop. Its unknown value x = Φ ext is drawn from a uniform prior on [0 , ϕ max Φ0] with ϕmax = 0 .1. At each of K = 4 epochs we pick a Ramsey delay 

τj from a fixed menu of ten log-spaced delays in [10 , 320] ns and a repetition count n ∈ { 1, 10 },then take n Ramsey shots at that delay. The likelihood for a single shot is 

p(y = 1 | x, τ ; c) = 12 + 12 th( x, c) e−A(x,c) τ −B(x,c)2 τ 2

cos ∆ω(x, c) τ , (38) where th , A, B, ∆ω are closed-form expressions in x and the hardware c. The outcome of n shots at a fixed delay is Binomial( n, p ). The reward is negative terminal posterior variance, Φ 0(bK ) = 

−Var( x | bK ). 

4.2 The measurement history reduces to a count-tuple 

The raw measurement history after k epochs is the list 

Hk =  (τ (1) , y (1) ), (τ (2) , y (2) ), . . . , (39) one entry per individual shot, recording which delay it was taken at and whether it returned a 1. 

Hk can be very long (up to forty entries for K = 4 at n = 10 per epoch) and it contains redundancy. The redundancy comes from two structural facts about the Ramsey likelihood, Equation (38): 1. Conditional independence. Given x and the hardware c, different shots are independent. The likelihood of the entire history factors into a product over shots. 12 2. Conditional identity within a delay. Given x, all shots at the same delay τj have the same success probability p(x, τ j ; c). They are therefore not merely independent but i.i.d. within each delay bin. Together these facts let us evaluate the likelihood of Hk by counting. Let Nj be the cumulative number of shots ever taken at delay τj in Hk, and Mj the cumulative number of those shots that returned a 1. Then 

p(Hk | x; c) = 

> J

Y

> j=1

p(x, τ j ; c)Mj 1 − p(x, τ j ; c)Nj −Mj . (40) Every other aspect of the history — the order of the shots, how they were split across epochs, how 

n was partitioned between 1-shot and 10-shot bursts — drops out of Equation (40). The pair ( N, M) = ( N1, . . . , N J , M 1, . . . , M J ) is, by the Fisher–Neyman factorization theorem, a sufficient statistic of the history for inference about x: any two histories that agree on ( N, M)are indistinguishable from the point of view of x. We arrange them into a single 2 J-integer object called the count-tuple ,

nk =  N1, M 1, N 2, M 2, . . . , N J , M J

. (41) 

nk is lossless (nothing about x has been discarded), permutation-invariant (shot order does not appear), and bounded (each Nj ≤ Kn max = 40). 

4.3 The belief reduces automatically 

The belief at step k is a functional of the history Hk through Bayes’ rule: 

bk(x) = p0(x) p(Hk | x; c)

R p0(x′) p(Hk | x′; c) dx′ . (42) But the numerator depends on Hk only through Equation (40), which depends only on nk. Con-sequently 

bk(x) = b(x | nk; c) ∝ p0(x)

> J

Y

> j=1

p(x, τ j ; c)Mj 1 − p(x, τ j ; c)Nj −Mj . (43) The belief is a deterministic function of the count-tuple: once you know n, you know b. Two histories with the same count-tuple have the same belief, regardless of how the measurements were ordered or split. 

4.4 The DP table reduces for free 

Now the Bellman machinery inherits the reduction directly. Vk is a function of the belief; the belief is a function of the count-tuple; therefore Vk is a function of the count-tuple: Vk(b) = Vk(n). The tabulation space collapses from the infinite-dimensional space of densities on [0 , ϕ max Φ0] to the space of 2 J-integer tuples with bounded entries. The chain of reductions is: 

Hk

|{z} 

> raw history, long list

−→ nk

|{z}  

> count-tuple, 2 Jintegers

−→ bk

|{z} 

> posterior, density

−→ Vk(nk)

| {z } 

> value function, one scalar per tuple

.

The first arrow is the Fisher–Neyman reduction on the likelihood; the second arrow is Bayes’ rule; the third arrow is the Bellman recursion. Critically, the first arrow is the only reduction; the rest 13 are functional consequences. This is the right way to think of it — not that the belief miraculously compresses, but that the data compresses because of a symmetry of the likelihood, and the belief (being a function of the data) inherits the compression automatically. 

4.5 Reachability and the size of the DP table 

The count-tuple nk is bounded: at K = 4 epochs with at most n = 10 shots each, the total shot count P 

> j

Nj is at most 40 and the tuple is sparse (at most four bins touched, because there are at most four epochs). The set of reachable count-tuples across all four epochs, as enumerated by a breadth-first search from the empty tuple, is approximately 10 7 distinct tuples. Each entry is a 64-bit float (the value-to-go). The table fits in memory. Figure 1 visualizes this enumeration at a very small problem size ( K = 3, J = 2, n = 1): 1 → 4 → 10 → 20 reachable count-tuples across the four layers, 35 nodes total, against a naive playout tree of 85 leaves-plus-internal-nodes. Even at this toy scale, 22 of the 35 count-tuples arise from more than one parent path (marked with a red ring) — the memoization collapse that the count-tuple representation exploits. At the paper’s full scale ( K = 4, J = 10, L = 2) the compression ratio grows to roughly two orders of magnitude. 

Figure 1: Reachable count-tuple DAG for a Ramsey-like DP at K = 3 epochs, J = 2 delays, n = 1 shot per epoch. Nodes: reachable count-tuples ( N1, M 1; N2, M 2), one column per epoch; colour = posterior mean ˆ x (plasma scale); size ∝ posterior precision 1 /σ ; red ring marks nodes reached by more than one parent path (the memoization collapse). Edges: colour by action ( τ1 / τ2), style by outcome ( y = 0 dashed / y = 1 solid). The compression-ratio box in the lower right compares the naive playout-tree size to the count-tuple DAG size. Right column: four representative posteriors — the prior at the root and three distinct terminal-belief shapes at k = 3. 14 4.6 Backward induction on count-tuples, in detail 

Posterior from a count-tuple. To evaluate any expectation the DP needs, we must be able to turn a count-tuple into a posterior. Discretize x on a grid of KΦ = 256 points x(1) , . . . , x(KΦ)

uniformly spaced across [0 , ϕ max Φ0]. The posterior at the i-th grid point, given count-tuple n, is 

b(x(i) | n) ∝ p0(x(i))

> J

Y

> j=1

p(x(i), τ j ; c)Mj 1 − p(x(i), τ j ; c)Nj −Mj , (44) with the constant of proportionality fixed by P 

> i

b(x(i) | n) = 1. The posterior variance and the outcome probabilities needed below are both computed from Equation (44) on the fly. 

Marginal outcome probability. If the current posterior (given n) is b(x | n) and we take an action ( τ, n ), the distribution over the number of “1”s is Pr( m | n, τ, n ) = X

> i

b(x(i) | n) Binomial  m n, p (x(i), τ ; c). (45) This is the marginal likelihood that will serve as the weighting in the Bellman backup’s expectation. 

Child tuple. If we take ( τj , n ) and observe m “1” outcomes, the new count-tuple has the same entries as n except ( Nj , M j ) becomes ( Nj + n, M j + m). We write this n′(n, j, n, m ). 

Bellman backup, derived step by step. Equations (46) and (47) below are the general Bell-man recursion of §3 (Equations (6)–(7)) specialized to four qubit-specific facts: the reward, the action space, the observation reduction, and the sufficient statistic. We articulate each substitution explicitly so the derivation can be verified line by line. 

Step 1: choose the reward Φ. Section 2 introduced three families of pointwise rewards. For the qubit problem we use the Bayesian-MSE-aligned reward, with terminal expression Φ 0(x, bK ) = 

−Var( x | bK ). This choice is motivated by the tower-law identity E[( ˆ xpm − x)2] = E[Var( x | bK )]: maximizing the prior-averaged Φ 0 is identically minimizing the deployed Bayesian MSE of the posterior-mean estimator. 

Step 2: collapse the leaf expectation. Substituting Step 1 into the general terminal Equation (6), the integrand −Var( x | bK ) is a deterministic function of the belief bK (it does not depend on the realization of x at the leaf). The conditional expectation is therefore trivial: 

VK (b) = Ex|b

−Var( x | b) = −Var( x | b).

This collapse is special to Φ Var ; it would not happen for Φ MI , whose leaf integrand retains an explicit x-dependence inside the entropy expectation. 

Step 3: encode the belief by the count-tuple. Equation (43) established that the posterior bk(x)depends on the history only through the count-tuple n = ( Nj , M j )Jj=1 . Writing the terminal belief as b(· | n) converts VK (b) into a function of the count-tuple, 

VK (n) = −Var  x | n,

which is Equation (46) below. 15 Step 4: specialize the action. In the general recursion the outer max s∈S ranges over an abstract action space. In the qubit sensor every action is the pair s = ( τj , n ) with delay-index j ∈ { 1, . . . , 10 }

and shot count n ∈ { 1, 10 }. The outer max becomes a finite enumeration of J × L = 20 candidates, max  

> s∈S

−→ max 

> j∈{ 1,..., 10 }
> n∈{ 1,10 }

.

Step 5: collapse the observation expectation y → m. At fixed action ( τj , n ), the raw observation 

yk is the bit string of n Bernoulli outcomes. The Ramsey likelihood (Equation (40)) depends on the bit string only through the count m ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , n } of “1” outcomes, by the same i.i.d.-within-a-delay argument that gave the count-tuple sufficient statistic. The expectation over the 2 n-outcome bit string therefore reduces to an ( n + 1)-element finite sum, 

Eyk |b,(τj ,n )[f (yk)] = 

> n

X

> m=0

Pr( m | n, τ j , n ) f (m),

with Pr( m | n, τ j , n ) given by Equation (45). This reduction is loss-less: no information about the bit-string-internal ordering enters the recursion because none enters the likelihood. 

Step 6: replace the belief operator T by the count-tuple update. The general operator T (b, s, y; c)is Bayes’ rule applied to belief b given action s and observation y. Applied to a count-tuple-encoded belief at action ( τj , n ) and observed count m, Bayes’ rule produces a new belief encoded by the count-tuple 

n′(n, j, n, m ) =  . . . , (Nj−1, M j−1), (Nj + n, M j + m), (Nj+1 , M j+1 ), . . . ,

with only the j-th entry incremented and all other entries untouched. The recursive lookup 

Vk+1 (T (b, s, y; c)) becomes the table lookup Vk+1 (n′(n, j, n, m )) on a finite, memoized table. 

Step 7: assemble. Substituting Steps 4, 5, and 6 into the general backup Equation (7) and Step 3 into the general terminal Equation (6) yields the qubit-specific recursion 

VK (n) = −Var  x | n, (46) 

Vk(n) = max 

> j∈{ 1,..., 10 }
> n∈{ 1,10 }
> n

X

> m=0

Pr( m | n, τ j , n ) Vk+1 

 n′(n, j, n, m ), (47) for k = K −1, . . . , 0. The optimal adaptive policy is π⋆k(n) = ( τj⋆ , n ⋆), the argmax of Equation (47). The joint-DP value at the prior is V ⋆ = V0(0), evaluated at the all-zero count-tuple representing the uniform prior. 

What each step relied on. Step 1 relied on the modeling choice Φ = Φ Var . Step 2 relied on the leaf integrand being a function of bK alone, special to Φ Var (no analogous collapse exists for ΦMI or Φ log J ). Steps 3 and 6 relied on the Fisher–Neyman count-tuple reduction of Equation (40). Steps 4 and 5 relied on the discrete action menu and the binomial-counted observation specific to the Ramsey protocol. Each substitution is exact; no approximation has entered. The resulting recursion is therefore the exact Bellman recursion for the qubit sensor, expressed in terms that admit memoized tabulation on count-tuple keys. 16 4.7 A miniature trace 

To make Equations (46)–(47) concrete, shrink the problem: K = 2, J = 2 delays, n ∈ { 1}

only. There are four candidate actions total, ( τ1, 1) , (τ2, 1) repeated at each epoch; twelve dis-tinct child tuples at epoch 2 (two delays times six possible aggregate counts of zero or one across the two shots — but since n = 1 at each step the reachable tuples after one epoch are 

{(1 , 0, 0, 0) , (1 , 1, 0, 0) , (0 , 0, 1, 0) , (0 , 0, 1, 1) }, four of them, each representing a different shot loca-tion and outcome). Starting from the all-zero tuple: 1. Terminal layer k = 2 . For each of the at most 4 + 4 × 4 = 20 reachable tuples, compute the posterior variance from Equation (44) and store V2(n) = −Var. 2. Layer k = 1 . For each of the four tuples reachable after one epoch, try both remaining actions. For each, compute the two child tuples (outcomes m = 0 and m = 1), look up their V2 values, and compute the marginal-outcome-weighted average. Take the best of the two actions. 3. Root k = 0 . Start at n = 0. Try both actions. For each, compute the two child tuples at k = 1, look up their V1, and average. Take the best. The result is V ⋆ at the initial belief; the argmax tells us the optimal first action. For K = 4, J = 10, n ∈ { 1, 10 } the identical loop runs over ∼ 10 7 tuples and takes minutes on a single thread (the DP is embarrassingly memoized, each tuple visited once). The logic is unchanged. 

4.8 What the count-tuple reduction bought us 

Without the reduction, a brute-force playout tree at K = 4, |S| = 20, and up to 11 outcomes per action would have (20 × 11) 4 ≈ 2 × 10 9 leaves. With the reduction, a permutation of playouts that produces the same count-tuple collapses to one table entry; the reachable state space shrinks by roughly two orders of magnitude. The exactness of the reduction — no information about x is lost by representing a history as counts — is what makes this a lossless speedup rather than an approximation. 

# 5 Example 2: Radar beam search (discrete state, finite-belief DP) 

5.1 Problem statement 

A target sits in one of sixteen cells arranged on a ring: x ∈ { 1, . . . , 16 }, with uniform prior 

p0(x) = 1 /16. At each of K = 4 epochs we point a beam at some cell sk ∈ { 1, . . . , 16 } and observe 

yk ∈ { 0, 1} with Bernoulli likelihood 

p(yk = 1 | x, sk; c) = pFA + ( pD − pFA ) · Gc(θsk − φx), (48) with pD = 0 .9, pFA = 0 .05, cell bearings φx = 2 π(x − 1) /16, and Gc a top-hat beam pattern of integer width m (the hardware design variable). The reward is the mutual information I(x; y1: K ), which equals the prior entropy minus the expected terminal posterior entropy; maximizing it is equivalent to minimizing the expected terminal posterior entropy. 

5.2 The belief is a probability vector 

Since x is discrete with |X | = 16, the belief bk is a probability vector in the 15-simplex. It is already finite-dimensional; no reduction is needed. The Bayes update T is elementary: at belief b,17 action s, outcome y,

b′(x) = p(y | x, s; c) b(x)

P 

> x′

p(y | x′, s; c) b(x′) . (49) The DP is now a straight implementation of Equations (6)–(7) on beliefs. 

5.3 Reachable beliefs and the DP table 

Here the tabulation strategy is not to enumerate all probability vectors (uncountably many) but to enumerate the reachable beliefs — those that can actually arise from the uniform prior by a sequence of allowed actions and allowed outcomes. At K = 4 with binary outcomes and |S| = 16, the number of reachable beliefs across all four epochs is bounded by 16 4 ×24 = 10 6; in practice many fewer because many action-outcome sequences lead to the same belief. A breadth-first traversal from b0 = p0 records every reachable belief once and assigns it an index in a table. Alternatively, in the special case of the top-hat beam, the belief at any point has at most a constant number of distinct values — the cells inside the beam, the cells outside, conditioned on each detection history — so the reachable belief has a closed-form structure. But conceptually, the DP is just “belief in, value out.” 

5.4 Backward induction on beliefs, in detail 

Let Bk be the set of beliefs reachable exactly at step k (so B0 = {p0}). 

Terminal layer. For every b ∈ B K ,

VK (b) = 

> 16

X

> x=1

b(x) log b(x) − (prior entropy constant) , (50) the negative posterior entropy (plus a constant that cancels in the argmax). This is the reward for that terminal belief. 

Inductive step. For k = K − 1, K − 2, . . . , 0 and each b ∈ B k:

Vk(b) = max 

> s∈{ 1,..., 16 }

X

> y∈{ 0,1}

Pr( y | b, s; c) Vk+1 

 T (b, s, y; c), (51) where Pr( y | b, s; c) = P 

> x

b(x) p(y | x, s; c) is the marginal outcome probability under the current belief. The argmax is the optimal adaptive action at belief b with K − k steps left. 

Root. V ⋆ = V0(p0). The globally optimal policy is the collection {π⋆k : b 7 → arg max s . . . } for 

k = 0 , . . . , K − 1. 

5.5 A miniature trace: one cell, one beam, K = 2 

To see the structure of an optimal adaptive radar policy, consider the simplification K = 2 with a narrow top-hat beam that covers exactly one cell ( m = 1). From the uniform prior: 1. At epoch 1, for any choice of pointing cell s1, all 16 cells are equally plausible. The Bellman backup says try every s1; by symmetry they are all equivalent, so pick s1 = 1 without loss of generality. 18 2. Two outcomes are possible. If y1 = 1, the posterior concentrates on cell 1 up to the false-alarm rate; the remaining cells are weighted by pFA /[pD(1 − pFA ) + . . . ]. If y1 = 0, the posterior shifts weight slightly away from cell 1. 3. At epoch 2, the Bellman backup tries every s2. After a detection at cell 1, the best s2 is to point away from cell 1 at whichever cell now carries the second-highest belief (the MI gain is maximized by sampling from a cell you are uncertain about). After a miss at cell 1, the best s2

is similarly to point elsewhere. In words: the argmax at epoch 2 is different depending on whether y1 = 0 or y1 = 1. That is the adaptive gain. A fixed schedule of ( s1 = 1 , s2 = 2) commits to cell 2 before seeing y1 and thus cannot exploit the information in the outcome. For the full K = 4, m = 9 problem (the in-family optimum of the companion paper’s Section 5), the Bellman backup produces an adaptive policy that behaves like binary search on the posterior support: the first beam splits the ring in half; each subsequent beam targets the half whose posterior weight is highest, narrowing by roughly a factor of two per step. 

# 6 What the two examples share, and where they differ 

Qubit (Case B) Radar (Case A) 

State space X continuous, [0 , ϕ max Φ0] discrete, {1, . . . , 16 }

Belief object density on X probability vector in R16 

Belief reduction count-tuple (20 integers) (none needed) Action set S 10 delays × 2 rep counts 16 pointing cells Observation y Binomial( n, p ) Bernoulli Outcome count per action 2 or 11 2Horizon K 4 4Reward −Var( x | bK ) −H(bK ) (equiv. MI) DP table size ∼ 10 7 count-tuples ∼ 10 6 reachable beliefs The commonalities are load-bearing. Both problems fit the POMDP template, both reward families are scalar functionals of the terminal belief, both Bellman recursions take the form of Equation (7), and both are solved exactly by backward induction. The divergences are in the shape of the belief and the size of the DP table, both of which are consequences of the state-space dimensionality. Two lessons worth taking away: 1. Reduction is essential in continuous-state problems. The qubit problem only becomes computable because the Ramsey likelihood has a permutation symmetry that collapses the posterior to a 20-integer tuple. A generic continuous-state POMDP has no such luck and must be relaxed — Gaussian-moment propagation (EKF), particle filters, or neural-belief-state methods — at which point the DP is no longer exact. 2. Exactness is cheap in discrete-state problems. The radar problem runs directly on the natural probability-vector belief and returns a provably optimal policy without approximations, as long as the reachable belief set fits in memory. At K = 4, |X | = 16 it does; at K = 20 or 

|X | = 256 it would not, and the same relaxation pathway as the qubit problem would be needed. 19 7 Belief augmentation: when the posterior is not enough 

Both examples in this tutorial share a quiet simplification: the reward is a functional of the terminal posterior bK alone. In the qubit problem −Var( x | bK ) depends only on the shape of the posterior, and in the radar problem so does −H(bK ). Once the posterior is determined, the reward is determined — no reference to which actions produced it. This is what lets Step 2 of §3.3 go through: bK serves as a sufficient statistic of the trajectory for the reward , not just for x.Not every sensing reward has this property. The main paper’s Case C uses the Fisher-information-aligned reward Φ( x, s1: K ; c) = 12 log det JN (x, s1: K ; c), (52) where the accumulated Fisher-information matrix is 

JN (x, s1: K ; c) = J0 +

> K

X

> k=1

nk JF (x, τ k; c), (53) and JF is the per-shot Fisher matrix. The issue is immediate: JN depends explicitly on the action trajectory s1: K = (( τ1, n 1), . . . ), not just on the posterior those actions produced. Two schedules that happen to land on the same bK via different {(τk, n k)} choices give different JN , hence different reward. In other words: for Φ log J , bK is not a sufficient statistic of the trajectory for the reward. Step 2 of the derivation in §3.3 fails on its face. A direct application of Bellman’s recursion on bk alone would miscompute the value function — it would forget the schedule-dependent accumulator. 

7.1 The fix: enlarge what “belief ” means 

The cure is to redefine the state of the DP so that whatever extra information the reward requires rides along. For Φ log J we define the augmented belief 

˜bk :=  bk, J k

, Jk := J0 +

> k

X

> j=1

nj JF (x, τ j ; c). (54) Two quantities now move together: the posterior over x, which still updates by Bayes’ rule, and the accumulated Fisher matrix, which updates by additive accumulation: 

Jk+1 = Jk + nk+1 JF (x, τ k+1 ; c). (55) The augmented update operator is ˜T  ˜b, s, y; c =   T (b, s, y; c), J + n J F (x, τ ; c) , (56) with s = ( τ, n ). The reward at the terminal augmented belief is a pure functional of ˜bK :˜Φ0(˜bK ; c) = Ex|bK

 12 log det JK

. (57) With ( b, T, Φ0) replaced by ( ˜b, ˜T , ˜Φ0), the four-step derivation of §3.3 goes through unchanged — in particular, ˜bK is a sufficient statistic of the trajectory for the augmented reward, so Step 2 is rescued. Bellman’s recursion now lives on ˜b, and backward induction produces the correct Vk(˜b; c). 20 7.2 What augmentation costs and what it buys 

The cost is bookkeeping: for a d-dimensional state x, Jk is a symmetric d × d matrix, carrying 

d(d + 1) /2 extra real numbers in the state. In exact DP this multiplies the effective state-space dimensionality and the table size. In moment-based DP (Case C of the paper), where bk is already a compact Gaussian summary, the augmentation by Jk is a mild expansion of a small tuple. The benefit is that the Bellman machinery proceeds identically to the unaugmented case. The value function Vk(˜b; c) is well-posed, the recursion is exact, the argmax produces an optimal adap-tive policy, and (importantly) the envelope-theorem outer gradient on c that the companion paper exploits applies verbatim to the augmented belief. 

7.3 A rule of thumb for when to augment 

Look at the pointwise reward. List every action-dependent quantity it references. For each, ask: is it a functional of the posterior bK alone? If yes, leave the belief unaugmented; if no, augment by whichever accumulator would make the reward a functional of the augmented belief. Common triggers: 

• Fisher-information rewards. log det JN , tr JN , any function of an action-accumulated Fisher matrix. Augment by Jk.

• Cumulative cost or budget constraints. A reward that penalizes P 

> k

c(sk) — shot-count budgets, power budgets, time-resource constraints. Augment by the running cost sum. 

• Path-dependent rewards. Rewards that integrate observations or actions over the trajectory (entropy production, work extraction, dwell-time penalties). Augment by the relevant path integral. 

• Constraint indicators. “Has the trajectory stayed in a safe set?” Augment by a binary safety flag that latches off the first time the trajectory leaves the set. The recipe is always the same: redefine the DP’s state as (posterior, running accumulator), so that the reward is a functional of the new state and the Bayesian update T is closed over the new state. The tutorial’s qubit and radar examples correspond to the trivial case where no accumulator is needed. 

# 8 Connection to joint hardware-policy co-design 

Everything in this tutorial so far has assumed the hardware c is fixed: the DP produces the optimal adaptive policy π⋆(c) for whichever hardware was handed in. The companion paper wraps this inner DP inside an outer optimization over c — gradient descent on 

V ⋆(c) := V0(p0; c). (58) This section describes how the outer gradient ∂V ⋆/∂ c is computed, and why — despite the Bellman recursion being a max-of-expectations nested K levels deep — the gradient comes out of ordinary reverse-mode automatic differentiation with a single structural trick. 

8.1 Three enabling observations 

• Envelope theorem. The derivative of V ⋆(c) at a point where the inner policy is Bellman-optimal does not require differentiating through the argmax. The inner policy is treated as a constant function of c when taking the outer gradient; only the explicit c-dependence of the reward and the belief update matters. 21 • Policy-iteration warm-starting. As c drifts under outer gradient steps, the previously com-puted π⋆(cold ) is near-optimal for cnew . A full rebuild of the inner DP is not needed every outer step; a partial update suffices. 

• Decoupling of problem sizes. The cost of the outer loop scales with dc (the dimension of c); the cost of the inner loop scales with the DP table size. These are largely independent, which is why dc ∼ 10 5 (the photonic case) can coexist with inner DPs that fit in memory. 

8.2 Differentiating the Bellman recursion through c

The central obstruction to a mechanical gradient calculation is the max in the Bellman backup, Equation (7). The max is non-smooth, and a naive differentiation through it would pick up sub-gradient contributions corresponding to how the argmax itself shifts with c. The envelope theorem says those contributions vanish at the optimum. We spell out what remains. 

The envelope theorem, formally. Define the “Q-function” at step k,

Qk(b, s; c) := Eyk |b,s,c

Vk+1 (T (b, s, yk; c); c), (59) so that Vk(b; c) = max sk Qk(b, sk; c) and s⋆k(b; c) = arg max sk Qk(b, sk; c). The total derivative of Vk with respect to c splits into an indirect piece (via s⋆k) and a direct piece: 

∂V k

∂c (b; c) = ∂Q k

∂sk

(b, s⋆k; c) · ∂s⋆k

∂c (b; c)

| {z }

> =0 at the argmax

+ ∂Q k

∂c (b, s⋆k; c). (60) The first term vanishes because ∂Q k/∂ sk = 0 at an interior argmax (the first-order optimality condition); what survives is just the partial derivative of Qk with sk held fixed at s⋆k:

∂V k

∂c (b; c) = ∂Q k

∂c (b, s⋆k; c). (61) Equation (61) is the operational form of the envelope theorem: to differentiate Vk with respect to 

c, freeze the argmax and differentiate the integrand. No argmax sensitivity is needed. 

Three contributions to ∂Q k/∂ c. Write Qk as an explicit sum over outcomes (discrete yk for the qubit and radar problems, integral otherwise): 

Qk(b, s⋆k; c) = X

> yk

Pr( yk | b, s⋆k, c) Vk+1 

 T (b, s⋆k, yk; c); c. (62) Applying the product and chain rules with s⋆k held fixed, 

∂Q k

∂c = X

> yk

 ∂ Pr( yk | b, s⋆k, c)

∂c Vk+1 

 T (· · · ); c| {z }

> (i) outcome-probability term

+ Pr( yk | · · · ) ∂V k+1 

∂b

 T ; c · ∂T (b, s⋆k, yk; c)

∂c| {z }

> (ii) belief-update term

+ Pr( yk | · · · ) ∂V k+1 

∂c

 T ; c| {z }

> (iii) recursive term



. (63) Three pieces of the c-dependence enter: 22 1. Outcome-probability (i). c changes the likelihood of the measurement yk, which re-weights the future continuations. 2. Belief-update (ii). c enters the Bayesian update T through the likelihood factor, so the posterior landed on after observing yk shifts with c.3. Recursive (iii). Vk+1 itself depends on c — this piece is picked up by the same formula applied at step k + 1, which is the recursion that gives the gradient its backward-induction structure. The terminal gradient is ∂V K /∂ c = ∂Φbelief 0 (b; c)/∂ c, obtained by differentiating the reward at the terminal belief with respect to its own c arguments. Equation (63) mirrors the Bellman recursion itself: same DP graph, same memoization, same backward order. If V fits in memory, so does ∂V /∂ c.

8.3 A parallel recursion for ∂V k/∂ b

Equation (63) contains a factor ∂V k+1 /∂ b inside the belief-update term (ii). Conceptually this is a gradient of the value function with respect to its belief argument, and it satisfies its own backward recursion — a cleanly analogous story to the ∂V k/∂ c one. We derive it here because the derivation is short and makes explicit what the belief-update term in Equation (63) is actually using. 

Envelope identity for b. The same envelope-theorem argument applies with b in place of c.Differentiating Vk(b; c) = Qk(b, s⋆k(b; c); c) with respect to b,

∂V k

∂b (b; c) = ∂Q k

∂sk

(b, s⋆k; c) · ∂s⋆k

∂b (b; c)

| {z }

> =0 at the argmax

+ ∂Q k

∂b (b, s⋆k; c). (64) The indirect piece vanishes by first-order optimality at s⋆k, and the direct partial is what we need: 

∂V k

∂b (b; c) = ∂Q k

∂b (b, s⋆k; c). (65) 

Unfolding. Write Qk as a sum over outcomes (as in §3.3), 

Qk(b, s⋆k; c) = X

> yk

Pr( yk | b, s⋆k, c) Vk+1 

 T (b, s⋆k, yk; c); c, (66) and differentiate with respect to b using the product and chain rules: 

∂V k

∂b (b; c) = X

> yk

 ∂ Pr( yk | b, s⋆k, c)

∂b Vk+1 

 T (· · · ); c| {z } 

> (I) outcome-probability through b

+ Pr( yk | · · · ) ∂V k+1 

∂b

 T (· · · ); c · ∂T (b, s⋆k, yk; c)

∂b| {z } 

> (II) belief-update through b



(67) with terminal condition ∂V K

∂b (b; c) = ∂Φbelief 0 (b; c)

∂b . (68) Equation (67) is a proper recursion: ∂V k/∂ b at the current belief is expressed in terms of 

∂V k+1 /∂ b at child beliefs T (b, s⋆k, yk; c), initialized by Equation (68). It runs on the same DP graph and the same backward sweep as the value recursion itself. 23 Structural comparison to ∂V k/∂ c. Two observations: 

• Two terms survive, not three. Equation (63) (the c-gradient) has three contributions because 

c enters in three places: the outcome distribution, the belief update, and the recursive Vk+1 .Equation (67) (the b-gradient) has only two, because b enters only in the outcome distribution (through marginalization) and in the belief update (through Bayes’ rule). There is no “recursive-through-b” term separate from the belief-update path: Vk+1 only receives b via T , so the recursive dependence already lives inside term (II). 

• Both recursions share the same DP graph. At every reachable ( k, b) where Vk is tabu-lated, both ∂V k/∂ c (Equation (63)) and ∂V k/∂ b (Equation (67)) are evaluated as cotangents on the same graph. In practice, reverse-mode AD returns both simultaneously as intermediate cotangents during the single backward sweep through the argmax-frozen recursion. 

The Jacobian ∂T /∂ b. The belief-update Jacobian in term (II) is the Jacobian of Bayes’ rule. For discrete x with belief vector b = ( b1, . . . , b KΦ ), the update is T (b)( x) = b(x) p(y | x, s; c)/Z 

with Z = P 

> x′

b(x′) p(y | x′, s; c), and a short calculation with the quotient rule gives 

∂T (b)( x)

∂b (x′) = p(y | x, s; c)

Z

h

δxx ′ − b(x) p(y | x′, s; c)

Z

i

. (69) One almost never writes Equation (69) out in code; reverse-mode AD composes it automatically through the division in Bayes’ rule. The formula is useful for checking structure: ∂T /∂ b is a rank-one perturbation of a diagonal matrix, which means the belief-update term (II) in Equation (67) has a simple form (a marginal-likelihood-weighted sum of a diagonal and a rank-one contribution). 

When the recursion collapses. In the count-tuple formulation of §4, the “belief” is replaced by the discrete integer tuple n, and the “belief update” is the combinatorial operation of appending (nshot , m ) to bin j. ∂/∂ n does not exist as a gradient (the tuple is discrete), and ∂T /∂ n is trivially null. Equation (67) simply does not apply — which is fine, because Equation (63)’s term (ii) also vanishes in that representation and all c-dependence flows through terms (i) and (iii) as already noted. The ∂V k/∂ b recursion is the machinery that fills in term (ii) when the belief is treated as a continuous-argument object, which is what the Case C Gaussian-moment DP of the companion paper actually does. 

8.4 The operational recipe: freeze the argmax, then AD 

In practice one does not implement Equation (63) by hand. Instead the envelope theorem lets reverse-mode AD do the entire calculation in a single sweep, provided the argmax is frozen first. The recipe: 1. Forward pass (no AD). Run the backward induction from k = K down to k = 0, populating 

Vk(n; c) in a memoization dictionary. At each reachable ( k, n), record the argmax action s⋆k(n; c)alongside the value. No AD tape is active during this pass. 2. Gradient pass (AD-traced). Re-evaluate V0(p0; c) by traversing the DP graph a second time — but substitute the previously recorded s⋆k in place of the max sk . The expression being evaluated is now argmax-free: 

V0(p0; c) = X

> paths

h KY

> k=1

Pr( yk | bk−1, s⋆k, c)

i

Φbelief 0 (bK ; c). (70) By Equation (61) the value computed is numerically identical to the forward-pass value. 24 3. Reverse-mode AD. Wrap Equation (70) in Zygote.pullback (or an equivalent reverse-mode AD system) and apply the pullback. Because every primitive in the expression is either closed-form in c or c-free, AD returns the exact ∂V 0/∂ c without any custom rule. The essential point: freezing the argmax turns the Bellman recursion into an ordinary differ-entiable expression . Without that step, AD would try to differentiate through the max, producing subgradient terms that the envelope theorem already tells us are zero at the optimum. With that step, the non-smooth max disappears from the AD graph entirely. 

8.5 What is c-dependent in the qubit problem 

To make Equation (63) concrete: in the Ramsey flux sensor of §4, only one primitive carries c in the entire DP — the Ramsey single-shot likelihood 

p(x, τ ; c) = 12 + 12 th( x, c) e−A(x,c) τ −B(x,c)2τ 2

cos ∆ω(x, c) τ ,

whose four rate/coefficient parameters (th , A, B, ∆ω) are closed-form functions of the seven hard-ware components of c. Every other object in the DP inherits its c-dependence from this single primitive: 

• The marginal outcome probability Pr( m | n, τ, n shot ; c) (Equation (45)) is a finite sum of Bino-mial factors evaluated at p(xi, τ ; c); its c-gradient comes through p.

• The belief b(x | n; c) (Equation (43)) is a normalized product of Ramsey factors; its c-gradient is the log-likelihood-ratio score weighted by the unnormalized posterior and renormalized. 

• The terminal reward VK (n; c) = −Var( x | n; c) depends on c only through its dependence on b.

• The count-tuple state space, the action grid {(τj , n shot ) : j, n shot }, and the combinatorial child-tuple update n 7 → n′ are c-free. Consequently the AD graph for ∂V 0/∂ c contains a single c-dependent primitive (the Ramsey function), composed through the DP tree with the chain rule doing all of the bookkeeping. No custom rrule for the Bellman max operator is needed — that is the entire operational payoff of the envelope theorem. The interested reader should turn to Sections 3 and 4 of the companion paper for the envelope-theorem statement in its full generality and the relaxation hierarchy that kicks in when the inner DP is not tractable even once. This tutorial has covered only the tractable-inner-DP case, which corresponds to the paper’s rungs 1 and 2 (Case Studies A and B). 

# 9 Further reading and standard references 

• Classical DP. Bellman, Dynamic Programming , 1957. Bertsekas, Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control , volumes I and II, especially the finite-horizon chapters. 

• POMDPs. Kaelbling, Littman & Cassandra, “Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic domains,” Artificial Intelligence , 1998. Smallwood & Sondik, “The optimal control of partially observable Markov processes over a finite horizon,” Operations Research , 1973. 

• Bayesian optimal experimental design (one-step). Chaloner & Verdinelli, “Bayesian ex-perimental design: a review,” Statistical Science , 1995. Lindley, Making Decisions , 1971. 

• Sequential OED. Huan & Marzouk, “Sequential Bayesian optimal experimental design,” Jour-nal of Computational Physics , 2016. Kreucher & Kastella, “Sensor management using an active sensing approach,” Signal Processing , 2005. 

• Reinforcement learning (the large-K, neural-policy regime). Sutton & Barto, Reinforce-ment Learning: An Introduction , 2018. 25 A On Φ0 and the reward conversion from pointwise to belief-level 

The pointwise reward Φ( x, s1: K ; c) takes x as an argument; the belief-level reward the DP actu-ally consumes is Ex|bK [Φ 0(x, bK ; c)], which takes only bK and c. The conversion is exactly one integration against the posterior. For the two rewards used in this tutorial: 

• Posterior variance. Φ( x, s1: K ; c) = −(x− ˆx(bK )) 2 with ˆ x(bK ) = E[x | bK ] the posterior mean. Integrating gives Ex|bK [−(x − ˆx)2] = −Var( x | bK ), a pure functional of bK .

• Mutual information. Φ0(x, bK ; c) = log bK (x)−log p0(x). Integrating gives Ex|bK [log( bK /p 0)] = KL( bK ∥p0). Averaging further over bK under the prior gives the mutual information I(x; y1: K ). A third case (Case C of the companion paper) uses Φ 0 = 12 log det JN (x, s1: K ; c), where the Fisher-information matrix JN depends on the action trajectory explicitly. In that case the “belief” is augmented to carry the accumulated JN as an extra piece of state, so that the action-dependence folds into the belief and Φ 0 becomes a function of the augmented belief alone. 26