Title: 2607.10066v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.10066v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 00:21:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
A neuromorphic vision system for open-world visual intelligence 

Authors 

Jiankai Yin 1 † , Zheng Miao 2,3 † , Lianghao Guo 1 † , Cong Li 4, Shengbo Wang 4, Hongfu Xu 1, Weihao Ma 1,

Yuyang Zeng 5, Yubiao Luo 2,3 , Yongxiang Li 2,3 , Saitao Zhang 2,3 , Arokia Nathan 6,7 , Luigi Occhipinti 8, Shuo 

Gao 4* , Zhong Sun 2,3,9* , Xiaoyu Guo 5* 

Affiliations  

> 1

School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191 , China  

> 2

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China  

> 3

School of Integrated Circuits, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China  

> 4

School of Instrumentation and Optoelectronic Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China  

> 5

Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China  

> 6

School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China  

> 7

Darwin College, University of Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, Cambridge, UK  

> 8

School of Mechanical, Electrical and Manufacturing Engineering, Loughborough University, 

Loughborough LE11 3TU, UK  

> 9

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Integrated Circuits, Beijing 100871, China 

> †

These authors contributed equally to this work 

> *

Correspondence to shuo_gao@buaa.edu.cn, zhong.sun@pku.edu.cn , xiaoyguo@cityu.edu.hk 

Abstract 

Time-efficient and robust visual intelligence remains a critical challenge in unstructured open-world 

environments, yet current approaches often rely on computationally intensive neural architectures or 

task-specific sensors with limited versatility. Inspired by biological vision and information bottleneck theory, 

we report a neuromorphic vision system that performs task-oriented visual intelligence through an 

information distillation strategy (named as task traction mechanism) implemented on hardware. The system 

integrates a polarization-sensitive imager with a resistive random-access memory (RRAM) array to 

progressively distill task-relevant information via light field selection, region of interest extraction, and 

target anticipation. The neuromorphic vision system conducts visual tasks within an execution time of 193 

μs. Evaluation across eight challenging open-world scenarios shows accuracy improvements of 25.54%, 

37.73%, and 36.10% for object tracking, object segmentation, and trajectory prediction, respectively, 

together with an average 30.6-fold reduction in latency relative to state-of-the-art solutions. 

Introduction 

Vision-based perception is central to decision-making in autonomous systems [1 -5]. However, 

achieving time-efficient and reliable perception remains challenging in unstructured open-world 

environments [6 -9], as evidenced by the 5.25-fold increase in autonomous vehicle accidents during dusk and 

dawn , owing to strong luminance variations and glare [10]. Current algorithmic approaches improve 

reliability by scaling up training datasets [11 -15] and adopting complex image enhancement models [16 -25], 

but the resulting computational overhead and inference latency limit their use in real-time application 

scenario s such as autonomous driving (SNote 1). Recently, task-specific perception based on 

multidimensional light field information has been widely explored in vision systems [26 ], including 

polarimetric [27-29 ], infrared [30-32 ], and hyperspectral information [33-35 ] (SNote 2). While effective 

towards specific task s, such as reflection removal, low light thermal sensing, or spectral material separation 

(Figures 1(a) and (b) ), their performance are limited under the diversity of real-world scenes, hence a

pathway towards task-adaptive perception is highly expected. 

Guided by information bottleneck theory, preserving task-relevant information while compressing the 

input has been identified as a promising pathway towards enhancing the efficiency of visual information processing in unstructured scenes [3 6, 37]. At the system level, this can be achieved by selectively distilling 

light field information according to task demands (SNote 3). A biological archetype for this information 

distillation is found in the visual pathway of the dragonfly: first, the dragonfl y selectively utilize s light field 

intensity and polarization according to environmental demands, in which polarization provid es critical 

information on surface geometry, material properties, and scattering [38, 39]; second, its visual pathway 

identifies task-relevant regions through the spatiotemporal filtering of large monopolar cells (LMCs) [40-42]; 

finally, they predict the short-term trajectories of moving targets through the small target motion detector 

(STMD) [43, 44 ] (SNote 4). Through this pathway, the dragonfly preserves information relevant to the target 

while compressing other visual inputs, which supports reliable hunting in unstructured environments, such 

as low light conditions, reflective water surfaces, and camouflage, with low latency and high success rates 

[45 ]. 

Drawing inspiration from the information bottleneck theory and the visual pathway of the dragonfl y,

we develop a neuromorphic vision hardware system with a task traction mechanism for task-adaptive rapid 

and robust visual perception in unstructured environments. The system consists of a 12 ×12 array of 

polarization-sensitive photodiodes composed of PVA/TAC-based linear polarizers and silicon PIN 

photodiodes , together with an 8×8 1T1R Ti/Pt-HfO2-Ta/Pt resistive random-access memory (RRAM) 

crossbar array fabricated by back-end-of-the-l ine (BEOL) processing directly atop the complementary 

metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) circuitry. The former sense s multidimensional light field information, 

including intensity, polarization, and wavelength, with a polarization extinction ratio of 9000:1, whereas the 

latter supports the temporal variation perception and analogue computation required by the task traction 

mechanism, with a wide programmable conductance range and retention time exceeding 100 ks. 

The task traction mechanism consists of three sequential modules as shown in Figure 1(c): In the 

feature traction, light field information sensed by the polarization -sensitive photodiodes enters the 

nonvolatile conductance states of the RRAM to compute a gradient -based metric for polarization and light 

intensity images , enabling dynamic selection of the sensing information most relevant to the current scene. 

Subsequently, attention traction exploits transient temporal cue in the light field via dynamic conductance 

modulation of the RRAM to extract region of interest (ROI). Finally, prediction traction harnesses temporal 

cue retained in the conductance states of the RRAM to anticipate the target, thereby reducing system latency 

(Figure 1(d)). Collectively, these modules constitute a task traction mechanism realized through the 

hardware system at the perceptual front end. By preserving task-oriented information while suppressing 

redundant input, the neuromorphic vision system enables visual intelligence in open-world environments, 

with an average visual task execution time of 193 μs. 

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed system, we conduct experiments across eight open-world 

scenarios, including specular reflection, water reflection, scattering, camouflage, low light, high dynamic 

range, transparent interference, and illumination variation. By exploiting task-relevant information, the 

system achieves accuracy improvements of 25.54%, 37.73%, and 36.10% for object tracking, object 

segmentation, and trajectory prediction, respectively, together with a 30.6-fold latency reduction relative to 

state-of-the-art (SOTA) machine vision baselines [16 –25]. Finally, we validate the system on a

vehicle-mounted platform for autonomous driving, where it outperforms existing solutions, including RGB 

cameras [46], infrared cameras [47] , LiDAR [48] , millimeter wave radar [49] , and event cameras [50] ,

establishing a feasible route toward rapid and robust perception in unstructured environments. Figure 1 The challenges of open -world unstructured visual perception and the solution with the 

task traction mechanism . (a) Diverse and unpredictable visual conditions in open -world unstructured 

scenes, such as backlight, high dynamic range, transparent interference, camouflage and scattering, pose 

various challenges across both information and computation levels. (b) Representative autonomous driving 

scenarios under day and night conditions. (c) Task traction mechanism for in-sensor information distillation. 

Multidimensional light field information are progressively processed through feature traction for light field 

selection, attention traction for region of interest extraction, and prediction traction for forthcoming object 

trajectory . (d) Only distilled task-relevant information is delivered to visual tasks, enabling object tracking ,

object segmentation, and trajectory prediction with higher accuracy and lower processing time than 

whole -field global calculation. 

Results 

System overview 

The neuromorphic vision system is composed of a polarization-sensitive imager, neuromorphic 

processor and FPGA (Figures 2(a)-2 (c)). The polarization-sensitive imager comprises a 12 ×12 polarizer 

array and a 12 ×12 photodiode array, with the former decomposing incident light into four polarization 

components at 0°, 45 °, 90 °, and 135 °, and the latter converting the light components into electrical signals. 

These signals are grouped into four-channel units and sent into the light field processing circuit, where 

intensity and polarization information are delivered to the computation region of the RRAM array to obtain 

their gradient features (i.e., feature traction) and select the light field that is relevant to the current scene. The 

selected information is then routed to the temporal feature extraction circuit, which extracts temporal 

features of the target and converts them into modulation voltages. These voltages are applied to the 

perception region of the RRAM array, driving conductance state changes that serve as temporal cues (i.e., 

attention traction), which are subsequently read out and transferred to the FPGA for ROI generation. 

Subsequently, the temporal cues are fed back into the computation region of the RRAM array to derive 

motion intensity, which is combined with the ROI to anticipate the target (i.e., prediction traction). Finally, 

the selected light field from the light field processing circuit and the ROI are jointly processed in the FPGA 

for downstream visual tasks. More detailed descriptions of the task traction mechanism and the heterogeneous information processing implemented across the computation, perception, and monitoring 

regions of a single RRAM array are presented in section ‘Methods ’ and SNote 5. 

Figure 2 Hardware implementation and proof of concept validation of the neuromorphic vision 

system. (a,b) Exterior and internal views of the integrated vision system, comprising a polarization sensitive 

imager, neuromorphic process or and FPGA. (c) Exploded view of the hardware architecture, including the 

polarizer array, photodiode array , light field processing circuit, temporal feature extraction circuit, RRAM 

array, RRAM read and write (R/W) circuit and FPGA. (d,e) Cross sectional electron microscopy images of a

representative 1T1R RRAM cell and the Ti/Pt -HfO 2-Ta/Pt device stack. (f) Optical micrograph of the 

fabricated 1T1R RRAM array. (g) Current-voltage characteristics of a representative 1T1R cell measured 

under different gate voltages, showing reliable resistive switching behavior. (h) Reversible analogue 

conductance modulation of a representative RRAM cell under successive set and reset voltage pulses. (i) 

Experimentally measured conductance evolution of representative RRAM cells in the integrated 

neuromorphic vision system during proof-of-concept validation under specular interference, where A, B and 

C correspond to low-, medium- and high-frequency voltage modulation, respectively. (j) Radar-chart comparison of object tracking, object segmentation and trajectory prediction using the proposed system and 

the full image intensity baseline. (k) Quantitative performance comparison for tracking IoU, segmentation 

F1 score and trajectory prediction ED. (l) End -to -end latency comparison across the three downstream visual 

tasks. 

Design and characteristics of the polarization-sensitive imager 

The polarization-sensitive imager consists of a 12 ×12 linear polarizer polymer array and a 12 ×12 

photodiode array. The polarizer units are arranged with analyzer orientations of 0°, 45 °, 90 °, and 135 °. The 

polarizing film covers the 400 -700 nm spectral range, with an extinction ratio of approximately 9000:1, and 

a single sheet transmittance is of 42 ± 2%. The photodiode array is composed of visible band silicon PIN 

photodiodes, each with a photosensitive area of 7.5 mm 2, a peak sensitivity at 550 nm, and a spectral 

bandwidth of 440-700 nm. To suppress optical crosstalk, the polarizer to photodiode spacing is set to 0.45 

mm, minimizing lateral displacement under oblique incidence. Photocurrents from the four channels are 

converted into stable voltage outputs by transimpedance amplifier readout circuits for subsequent light field 

information processing. Finally, the assembled polarization sensitive photodetector is characterized using 

integrating spheres, yielding degree of polarization, angle of polarization and light intensity ’s RMSE values 

at 0.03 (3.00% error), 3.36 ° (1.87%), and 3.13%, respectively. More details are provided in Figure S1. 

Fabrication and characterization of RRAM array 

The RRAM array used in this work is fabricated through a BEOL compatible process integrated with 

the CMOS circuitry, as illustrated in Fig ure 2(d). Initially, the bottom electrode, composed of a 5 nm Ti 

adhesion layer and a 40 nm Pt layer, is deposited by magnetron sputtering and patterned via 

photolithography and lift-off. Subsequently, a 5 nm HfO 2 dielectric layer is deposited by atomic layer 

deposition (ALD). Contact vias are then opened through the dielectric layer using photolithography and 

inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching. Finally, the top electrode stack, consisting of a 30 nm Ta layer 

and a 150 nm Pt layer, is deposited by magnetron sputtering and patterned to complete the device structure, 

as shown in Figure 2(e). An optical photograph of the 1T1R array is shown in Figure 2(f). Figure 2(g) 

presents the I-V characteristics of a representative 1T1R cell measured under eight distinct gate voltage 

conditions, with 20 cycles recorded for each condition, clearly revealing the SET and RESET transitions. 

Using a write-verify scheme, the fabricated RRAM array can be reliably programmed into multiple 

distinguishable analog ue conductance states with a programming accuracy within 5 μS, corresponding to 

~1.5% of the full conductance window, and retention exceeding 100 ks (see Figures S2-S 5). The RRAM 

array also exhibits fast switching under 30 ns programming pulses and reliably undergoes SET and RESET 

transitions, see Figures S6-S 7 and Figure 2(h) . Figure 2(i) and Figures S8 display that visual input variations 

can be converted into corresponding RRAM conductance evolution through voltage modulation. Benefiting 

from rapid conductance modulation and long retention time, the RRAM array enable s heterogeneous 

information processing across distinct functional regions of a single array, as detailed in the Methods 

section. 

Validation in unstructured open-world scenes 

After integrating the hardware components, we evaluate the neuromorphic vision system under specular 

interference as a proof-of-concept validation of the proposed task traction mechanism, as shown in Figure 

S9. Object tracking, object segmentation and trajectory prediction are compared with a full-image 

light-intensity baseline using intersection over union (IoU), F1 score and Euclidean distance (ED) as the 

corresponding metrics, respectively, with details provided in SNote 6. Compared with the baseline 

implemented on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4080 GPU, the fully hardware system improves the accuracy of 

tracking, segmentation and trajectory prediction by 214%, 358% and 62%, respectively. At the same time, it 

reduces the task latency to 193 μs, corresponding to a 4.6-fold decrease, and achieves approximately 

128-fold lower power consumption. Detailed comparisons are provided in Supplementary Note 13 and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2. 

To assess the scalability of the proposed neuromorphic vision system (SNote 7) in more complex 

open-world scenes, we establish a benchmark spanning eight challenging conditions: specular reflection, 

water reflection, scattering, camouflage, low light, high dynamic range, transparent interference, and 

complex illumination. Using this benchmark, we compare the proposed method with SOTA approaches for 

object tracking, object segmentation, and trajectory prediction in simulation. The baselines encompass four 

representative models: (1) a base model that directly processes the original visual input via Farneback [51] 

(SNote 8), (2) an enhancement model that applies scenario-specific image enhancement before the base 

model, including eight methods [16-23] such as DSRNet for reflection removal [17] and CIDNet for low 

light enhancement [19], (3) an end-to-end model that directly maps input images to outputs (YOLOv11 [11]), 

and (4) a multi-sensor fusion model that fuses different sensing modalities (Mask-DiFuser [24] and 

MoETrack [25]). Detailed descriptions of the benchmark scenarios and the baseline methods [11,16-25, 51] 

are provided in SNotes 9 and 10. 

Representative visual comparisons across the eight challenging scenarios are shown in Figure 3 and 

Figures S10-S17. Relative to the base model (denoted as RGB for clarity), the proposed system improves 

average task accuracy by 724.17%, 424.47%, and 74.31% for object tracking, object segmentation, and 

trajectory prediction, respectively. For latency evaluation, the end-to-end processing time is reduced by 

6.09 ×, 5.26 ×, and 5.55 × across the three tasks, respectively, as shown in Figures S18-S20. To further assess 

its competitiveness against established solutions for challenging visual perception, we evaluate 

representative methods and denote the best-performing result among them as SOTA. Comprehensive results 

for all evaluated methods are provided in STables 3-10. Relative to SOTA, the proposed system achieves 

average accuracy gains of 25.54%, 37.73%, and 36.10% for the three tasks, respectively, while reducing 

latency by 32.69 ×, 29.54 ×, and 29.86 ×.

These results indicate that the task traction mechanism improves task performance and computational 

efficiency by focusing processing on task-relevant regions. The effectiveness of each traction module, 

including feature traction, attention traction and prediction traction, is evaluated in Figures S21-S25. In 

addition, ablation experiments show that individually removing the three traction modules reduces average 

accuracy by 37.92%, 6.84%, and 31.97%, respectively, while increasing latency by 3.08 ×, 5.64 ×, and 3.26 ×.

Detailed quantitative analyses are provided in Figure S26 and STable 11. In addition, we also evaluate the 

performance of the task traction mechanism under RRAM array variability, and the results show that it is 

insensitive to moderate device variations, as shown in Figure S27. Figure 3 Performance of the neuromorphic vision system across diverse open -world 

unstructured scenes. Visualization of three downstream tasks across eight unstructured environments ,

including specular reflection, water reflection, scattering, camouflage, low light, high dynamic range, 

transparent interference, and illumination variation based on simulated RRAM array . From left to right, 

representative input scenes, object tracking , object segmentation, trajectory prediction, accuracy 

comparisons against base model and SOTA (the best-performing result among all evaluated methods) ,

and latency comparisons for the three visual tasks. 

Validation in autonomous driving 

To further evaluate the applicability of the neuromorphic vision system in practical scenarios, we mount 

the hardware system on the roof of a vehicle and examine its performance in autonomous driving under high 

dynamic range conditions, as shown in Figure S28 . Compared with the baseline method using full-image 

light intensity information, the system improves object tracking, object segmentation, and trajectory 

prediction by 329%, 1116%, and 63%, respectively, while reducing end-to-end latency by 4.1-fold, 4.6-fold, 

and 3.9-fold. More detailed results are provided in Figures S29-S31, and STable 12. To assess the scalability of the proposed neuromorphic vision system in more complex autonomous 

driving scenarios, we further conduct evaluations in an underground parking garage characterized by low 

illumination and pronounced luminance variations, which substantially degrade visual quality and make 

moving vehicles and pedestrians difficult to identify using conventional perception systems, as shown in 

Figures 4(a) -(c) [52 , 53 ]. The qualitative results in Figures 4(d) -4 (f) show that the neuromorphic vision 

system enables reliable perception performance . Quantitative comparisons with SOTA under the same 

experimental condition are summarized in Figure 4(g). As detailed in Figure 4(h), object tracking accuracy 

boosts approximately 195 %, object segmentation performance increases by 121 %, and trajectory prediction 

error decreases by 80%. In addition to accuracy gains, the task traction mechanism significantly reduces 

computational latency. As shown in Figure 4(i), the end-to-end processing time for tracking, segmentation, 

and prediction decreases by 17 ×, 18 ×, and 17 ×, respectively. More detailed results are provided in STable 13. 

These results demonstrate that the task traction mechanism supports reliable and time-efficient visual 

perception in challenging autonomous driving scenes. 

We further compare the proposed approach with representative sensing modalities used in autonomous 

driving, including RGB cameras [46], infrared cameras [47], LiDAR [48], millimeter-wave radar [49], and 

event cameras [50] , as summarized in Figure 4(j). Our work demonstrates robust performance across nine 

conditions, including transparent obstacles, camouflage and complex illumination. In contrast, existing 

sensing modalities exhibit limitations. For instance, RGB cameras are highly sensitive to illumination 

variation, leading to significant degradation under low light or high dynamic range conditions [18] . LiDAR 

and millimeter-wave radar infer object positions primarily from reflected signals , therefore in enclosed 

environments, multi-path reflections from walls and structural surfaces introduce ghost measurements and 

localization ambiguity [54, 55] . In thermally homogeneous underground environments, infrared cameras 

provide limited discriminative cues owing to their reliance on thermal contrast [56] . Event cameras are 

effective for detecting fast moving targets, whereas static or slowly moving objects may generate 

insufficient event responses, potentially compromising autonomous driving safety, as in the case of 

stationary pedestrians or stopped vehicles [57] .

These results and comparisons demonstrate that the proposed neuromorphic vision system enables 

robust, accurate and low-latency perception in challenging autonomous driving scenarios. This advantage 

arises from the task traction mechanism, which preserves task-relevant information while compressing the 

input, providing a promising visual foundation for autonomous systems. Figure 4 Autonomous driving evaluation of the neuromorphic vision system against SOTA 

perception methods and sensing modalities. (a –c) Representative autonomous driving scenes in an 

underground parking garage under low illumination and pronounced luminance variation, where pedestrians, 

vehicles and transparent obstacles are difficult to perceive using conventional vision systems. (d –f) 

Qualitative result of the proposed work applied to three downstream visual tasks based on simulated RRAM 

array . (g) Quantitative performance comparison with SOTA methods (the best performing result selected 

from four perception strategies) in terms of tracking IoU, segmentation F1 score and trajectory prediction 

ED . Objects A, B, and C are defined as shown (a). (h) Statistical comparison of overall performance for 

tracking, segmentation and trajectory prediction. (i) End-to-end latency comparison for the three 

downstream visual tasks. (j) Comparison with autonomous driving sensing modalities across nine conditions, 

including transparent obstacles, camouflage and complex illumination. 

Discussion 

Comparison with existing computer vision and artificial vision solutions Current perception approaches for unstructured open-world environments can be generally categorized 

into two routes. The first route improves perception reliability by increasing data scale or model complexity 

to adapt to diverse scene conditions [11-25]. Ithaca365 improves autonomous driving perception under 

challenging conditions by scaling up the training set, yielding a dataset of 682K images [13]. FlowIE [18] 

and CIDNet [19] improve degraded inputs by introducing image restoration models before downstream 

perception, whereas SAM 2 [12] improves performance by scaling up model capacity to 224.4M parameters. 

However, their performance degrades sharply when scenes differ substantially from the training dataset. 

Moreover, larger models significantly increase end-to-end latency in the perception pipeline (SAM2 requires 

390 ms to segment a 960 × 540 image on a Tesla T4 GPU). 

The second route incorporates advanced visual sensing, enabled by photosensitive materials and 

devices, to provide additional light field information beyond conventional light intensity imaging [26-35]. 

For example, geometric filterless photodetectors have been designed to provide polarization sensitive 

infrared cues that benefit target discrimination and material identification under weak intensity contrast [30]. 

Hyperspectral image sensors integrate wavelength selective material and filter structures to improve object 

recognition, material segmentation and scene understanding [33,34]. However, their performance are 

tailored towards specific conditions and remains limited in more general, open-world visual tasks. 

Our results demonstrate that the proposed task traction mechanism addresses this gap by adapting 

perception to task demands. By selecting task-relevant light fields, extracting task regions and anticipating 

target trajectory, the system restricts processing to task-relevant cues, thereby mitigating performance 

degradation caused by task-irrelevant inputs in unstructured environments and enabling reliable, 

time-efficient open-world perception. Other light field modalities beyond polarization and intensity, 

including infrared and spectral information are also compatible within the framework introduced in this 

work. 

Comparison with existing neuromorphic approaches for vision 

Recently, a wealth of research has leveraged the non-volatile state retention of neuromorphic devices 

(such as phase-change memory and RRAM) to accelerate computation in the context of machine vision 

[58-62]. In situ spectral reconstruction is implemented on a memristor chip by physically mapping the 

spectral decoding process into memristor in [5 9], achieving a 26.5 × speedup . Spike-based dynamic 

computing is realized on an asynchronous sensing and computing neuromorphic chip, where sparse 

event-driven signals are processed with spiking neural networks for efficient computation [63]. However, 

these approaches focus on post-perception inference and computation, whereas the inference in vision tasks 

can involve a large number of parameters for whole-image processing, which can contribute to considerable 

computational cost and latency. By contrast, the proposed system uses neuromorphic hardware to preserves 

task-relevant information and suppresses redundant background responses at the perception front end, 

thereby reducing the computational burden of downstream visual tasks. 

Furthermore, to implement this mechanism at the sensor front end, we design the RRAM array to 

support selective perception and in-sensor computation within a single array. This design requires the 

RRAM array cells to support both rapid conductance updates (for spatiotemporal variation perception) and 

stable conductance retention (analogue gradient computation). This capability can be attributed to the 

coordinated design of the material stack, switching interfaces, and 1T1R circuit architecture. Specifically, 

the 5 nm HfO 2 switching layer deposited by atomic layer deposition provides a highly uniform and dense 

dielectric matrix that minimizes defect clustering and ensures consistent switching behavior across the array. 

This ultrathin dimension enables strong electric field confinement at low operating voltages, which 

accelerates oxygen ion drift and supports 30 ns conductance modulation. The reactive Ta layer at the top 

electrode interface functions as an oxygen reservoir that promotes a localized oxygen-vacancy-rich region 

near the Ta/HfO 2 interface. This interfacial vacancy distribution reduces the energy barrier for conductive 

filament formation and rupture, contributing to the observed high-frequency switching capability. The 

chemically inert Pt bottom electrode provides a stable nucleation surface that helps localize filament growth 

and suppresses uncontrolled interfacial reactions, supporting long-term retention and endurance. The relatively thick top electrode stack (30 nm Ta and 150 nm Pt) ensures low series resistance, which helps 

minimize parasitic RC delays during high-frequency operation. Integration within a 1T1R architecture 

provides precise compliance current control through the access transistor, preventing excessive filament 

growth and enabling accurate, incremental conductance updates required for analogue neuromorphic 

temporal coding. Together, these design choices in materials selection, interface engineering, and circuit 

integration collectively enable the RRAM array to achieve both rapid dynamic response and stable 

conductance retention. 

General principles for task-oriented perception 

More fundamentally, our results suggest two basic principles that extend beyond vision to general 

perceptual processing. First, task demands should guide information acquisition at the perceptual front end. 

In complex environments, task-irrelevant signals increase computational cost and interfere with 

task-relevant information. A perceptual system should therefore prioritize task-relevant information at the 

front end, while suppressing interfering signals before they propagate into downstream computation. Second, 

prediction should guide subsequent perception. By anticipating targets trajectories, sensing can focus on 

task-relevant regions, thereby enriching useful information and reducing response time, as exemplified by 

dragonfly prey interception [43]. Together, these principles outline a general strategy for efficient, 

task-oriented perception. 

For example, in auditory perception within a crowded urban environment, multiple overlapping sounds 

such as conversations, traffic, sirens, and construction noise are simultaneously present. The task can 

prioritize certain sound components from the outset, such as the voice of a specific speaker, the horn of an 

approaching vehicle, or an emergency alarm, rather than processing all acoustic inputs equally. By focusing 

on task-relevant signals first, the system reduces interference from irrelevant background noise and 

improves recognition accuracy and processing efficiency. Prediction can then guide the next sensing step 

toward the expected spatial location, temporal window, or frequency range of the relevant source, based on 

recent changes in the signal, so that sensing and computation concentrate on the most informative channels. 

This approach shortens response time and stabilizes perception, even when the auditory scene changes 

rapidly and unpredictably. A similar principle can be applied to tactile perception during object manipulation. 

Instead of processing all contact signals equally, the task can prioritize tactile inputs that are most 

informative for grasp stability, such as sudden slip, rapid changes in pressure, or edge contact near the 

fingertips. Prediction can then be used proactively to direct subsequent sensing toward regions likely to 

experience instability, thereby enabling anticipation of incipient slip or object displacement and corrective 

adjustment of the grip before full grasp failure occurs. Taken together, these examples suggest that these two 

principles may extend beyond vision and provide a general framework for efficient perceptual processing. 

Method 

Task traction mechanism 

Enabled by the programmable, non-volatile, and rapidly modulated conductance states of RRAM, the 

task traction mechanism is implemented within a single functionally partitioned RRAM array to distill 

task-relevant information in unstructured scenes, as illustrated in Figures 5(a) and 5(b). The computation 

region utilizes programmable and retained conductance states to support stable analogue operations, 

including gradient-based feature evaluation for feature traction and motion-intensity estimation for 

prediction traction. The perception region exploits rapid conductance modulation to encode temporal 

variations of the selected light field into RRAM states, thereby generating temporal cues for attention 

traction. In parallel, the monitoring region provides a lightweight pathway for detecting unexpected motion 

outside the predicted task region. This configuration within a single RRAM array enables adaptive feature 

selection, temporal cue formation, and trajectory prediction to be integrated at the sensor front end, as 

schematically shown in Figures 5(c)-5(f). Figure 5 Task traction mechanism of the neuromorphic vision system for task-relevant information 

distillation. (a) In unstructured scenes, task-relevant targets and informative visual cues vary over time and cannot be 

specified a priori, resulting in substantial task irrelevant information redundancy and inefficient computation. (b) 

Schematic of the neuromorphic vision system and functional partitioning of the RRAM array into perception, 

computation and monitoring regions. (c) Feature traction: task-relevant light field is selected within a prediction task 

region (PTR) based on gradient features obtained in the computation region of the RRAM array. (d) Attention traction: 

temporal features of the selected light field modulate the perception of RRAM array to extract the task region (ROI ).

(e) Prediction traction: motion intensity is derived from temporal cues through computation region in the RRAM array 

to estimate target trajectory and update the predict ion task region for the next frame. (f) Lightweight monitoring: 

non-task regions are monitored in the monitor ing region of the RRAM array to detect unexpected motion and 

determine whether additional ROIs should be introduced for multi -target perception. 

Feature Traction 

In the feature traction, we design an adaptive feature selection (polarization and intensity) strategy 

based on gradient entropy( see Figure 5( c), and the physical interpretation and calculation process of the light 

field information are provided in SNote 11 and 12). Specifically, the light field information are firstly 

extracted from the prediction task region (PTR) generated by the prediction traction in the previous frame to 

obtain the local information within prediction task region: 

> 1

( , ) ( , ) ( , )local p  

> ttt

F x y M x y F x y   (1)

> t

F is the sensing light fi el d information , contain polarization (

 ) and intensity ( I ), and 1 ( , )p

> t

M x y  is the 

prediction task region from last frame. 

Subsequently, the gradient of the light field information within the prediction task region is computed. 

Specifically, prior to task execution, the RRAM array is programmed with voltage pulses to predefined 

conductance states, allowing it to operate as a stable gradient operator based on its non-volatile property. In 

this work, the gradient is computed using a Roberts Cross operator (as shown in Figure 6(a)): 1 0 0 1

,

0 1 1 0 

> xy

C C

   

        

(2)

It should be noted that other gradient operators can also be adopted within the same framework. For 

gradient kernels containing negative weights, the operator is decomposed into two non-negative kernels, and 

the signed gradient response is obtained through their subtraction: 

1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0

,

0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0     

> xxxyxx

C C C C C C          

              

       

(3)

Therefore, the gradients in the x and y directions can be calculated as follows (as shown in Figure 

6(a)): 

,local local local local          

> xxtxtyytyt

G C F C F G C F C F   

        (4)

After discretization and Shannon entropy calculation, the gradient entropy is obtained. Finally, feature 

traction selects the light field information with the maximum gradient entropy at local local 

> t

P and global 

scales global 

> t

P . The former is used for subsequent traction, whereas the latter is retained for monitoring. 

Attention Traction 

In the attention traction, a high-pass filtering circuit extracts the temporal variation of the selected local 

feature. The response magnitude is then converted by different operational amplifier into positive or 

negative modulation pulses, which are used as the modulation voltage applied to the RRAM array. This 

process can be expressed as: 

#  mod  

> ,1

( , ), ( , )local local   

> i j tt

V g h P i j P i j 

 (5)

Where ( ) h  is the high-pass filtering operation, and ( ) g  denotes the piece-wise stimulation function used 

to switching trends in the RRAM states, thereby enhancing task-relevant dynamic regions while suppressing 

background fluctuations and noise. It is important to note that for high-resolution images, such as 

1224 ×1024, the image is divided into multiple m n units, where 204 m  and 170 n  in this work. The 

signal derived from each unit is then used to modulate the RRAM conductance . For example, when a

pedestrian moves in front of the vehicle (Figures 6(b) and 6(c)), a pronounced voltage variation is observed 

at position (3, 4), generating a pulse (Figures 6(d) and 6(e)) that drives the RRAM device into a high 

conductance state (Figure 6(f)), and the RRAM state is denoted as tS , serving as the temporal cue . The 

RRAM state tS is then converted into the task regions in two steps. First, binarization is performed using a

predefined threshold. Second, morphological opening and closing are applied to refine the binarized regions, 

and connected regions with an area larger than a predefined pixel number threshold are retained as ROIs. 

This process produces one or multiple task regions, as shown in Figure 6(g). The task region map tM is 

defined as a binary map, where task-relevant regions are labeled as 1 and non -relevant regions as 0. 

Therefore, the current task-relevant features R

> t

P can be expressed as: 

( , ) ( , ) ( , )R local   

> ttt

P x y M x y P x y   (6)

Subsequently, R

> t

P is fed into downstream task s, such as object tracking, object segmentation, and 

trajectory prediction. 

Prediction Traction 

The prediction traction leverages the task region and the RRAM conductance state in the current frame 

to predict the task region in the subsequent frame, as shown in Figure 5(e). 

At time t , the horizontal and vertical variations of the RRAM state within the task region (denoted as 

> m
> t

S ) reflect the motion intensity of the target. These variations are computed using an RRAM-based gradient 

operator, as illustrated in Figure 6(a), and expressed as: ( , ) ( , )

,    

> mm
> motion motion tt
> xy

S x y S x y 

G G

x y

 

 

  (7)

The average gradient within tM is used to quantify the motion intensity: 

1 1

, ( , )( , ) motion motion    

> xyyx
> tt

Q Q G x y G x y 

M M

   (8)

Where tM denotes the number of pixels within the task region. xQ and yQ are regarded as the 

motion intensities of the target along the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively, and are mapped to 

the spatial displacement of the target ’s center position through a predefined transformation: 

( ), ( )x yx f Q y f Q     (9)

Where ( ) f  is the mapping function. Accordingly, the predicted center position of the target at the next 

time step is:  

> 1

( , )t t t y yp x x x x      (10 )

Where ( , )t tx y represents the center position of tM at the current frame t . Therefore, preliminary 

prediction task region in frame t is generated as p

> t

M , centered at 1tp  with the same height and width as 

> t

M . Subsequently, the final prediction task region p

> t

M is obtained by taking the union of p

> t

M and tM

as:    

> pp
> ttt

M M M  (11 )

Lightweight non-task region monitoring 

To monitor unexpected motion in non-task regions and determine whether additional ROIs should be 

added, we design a lightweight surveillance pathway. The overall mechanism consists of two stages. 

In the first step, the non-task region is partitioned into a p q grid to obtain a coarse-grained 

representation for the detection of unexpected motion , in this work 6p q  . Subsequently, row-wise and 

column-wise sums are computed to form low-dimensional monitoring indicators :  

> ,,
> 1
> ,,
> 1

(1 )( ) , 1, 2,..., 

(1 )( ) , 1, 2,...,         

> q
> tglobal
> ii j ti j
> j
> p
> tglobal
> ji j ti j
> i

r M P i p

c M P j q

> 
> 

  

  

# 

# 

(12 )

The monitoring vector can be represented as:  

> 11

[ ,... , ,..., ] p q 

> pq

m r r c c R 

  (13 )

In the second step, the monitoring signal is generated from the temporal difference of m between 

consecutive frames: 

#  ( ) ( ), ( 1) m  

> iii

V t h m t m t   (14 )

Where i represents the index in monitoring vector. Subsequently, the RRAM resistance state is modulated 

based on m

> i

V . When m

> i

V is below a predefined threshold, the modulation voltage is set to recover V , keeping 

the RRAM in a high resistance state and suppressing weak transient fluctuations. In contrast, when m

> i

V is 

sufficiently large and sustained, the RRAM state gradually evolves toward a low-resistance state, thereby 

amplifying the monitoring output. Therefore, the modulation voltage of i-th RRAM g

> i

V can be expressed 

as: 

( ), ( ) 

( ) , ( )        

> mm
> giith
> im
> recover ith

V t V t V

V t V V t V

 

  

(15 )Under the modulation of g 

> iV

, the resistance state of the RRAM changes, and the output spike voltage spike 

> iV

can be expressed as:       

> ( ) ( )
> ( )
> fspike
> ii
> RRAM
> R
> Vtm t
> Rt
> 

(16 )

Where RRAM R is the resistance of the RRAM , fR is a fixed resistor used to adjust the output range of  

> spike
> iV

. Figure 6(h) shows that environmental disturbances in non-task regions produce small and irregular 

inter-frame differential voltage fluctuations. After modulation, these weak fluctuations are suppressed, 

whereas sustained unexpected motion generates a pronounced output spike, as shown in Figure 6(i). When  

> spike
> iV

exceeds a predefined threshold, a warning signal is generated,and then, in the following frame, the 

selected global feature is introduced into attention traction, enabling unexpected motion in non-task regions 

to generate additional ROIs. 

Figure 6 Hardware operation of the task traction mechanism and lightweight monitoring 

pathway. (a) RRAM -based gradient operator implemented by differential conductance states for gradient 

feature calculation in feature traction and motion intensity estimation in prediction traction. (b,c) Emergence 

of a pedestrian and the resulting localized temporal response in the corresponding spatial unit. (d) 

Inter-frame differential voltage, with prominent responses exceeding the threshold at frame 180. (e) 

Corresponding conductance evolution of the RRAM under voltage stimulation, showing the transition from 

low- to high-conductance states. (f) Conductance map (temporal cue) of the array after modulation. (g) Task 

region (i.e., ROI) obtained by binarizing the temporal cue, with the red regions denoting the extracted ROIs .

(h) Differential voltage in non-task regions. (i) Output response of the lightweight monitoring pathway, 

which suppresses background fluctuations and generates a warning signal when unexpected motion occurs. 

Visual processing To demonstrate the scalability of the proposed system, visual inputs from unstructured and complex 

scenes are processed using simulated RRAM arrays. The switching dynamics of the RRAM are reproduced 

using a VTEAM model [64] calibrated with experimentally measured pulse response data (Figure S32). 

Running environment 

Performance evaluations of image enhancement methods and large-scale neural network models are 

conducted on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4080 Laptop GPU with 12 GB memory. In the proposed 

neuromorphic vision system, a Zynq-7020 FPGA is used to read out RRAM conductance states, generate 

modulation voltage and manage read/write operations. 

Consent for use of identifiable images 

All figures containing potentially identifiable images of individuals (including Figure 3,4 and 6 in main 

text and SNote12, Figures S10, S14-S17, S27-S28 in supplementary information) were captured with the 

participants ’ full awareness and cooperation. Written informed consent was obtained from all individuals 

involved, granting permission to use and publish their images in this research. Reference 

[1] Biederman, I. Perceiving real-world scenes. Science 177, 77 –80 (1972). 

[2] Sperling, G. & Melchner, M. J. The attention operating characteristic: examples from visual search. 

Science 202, 315 –318 (1978). 

[3] Sagi, D. & Julesz, B. ‘Where ’ and ‘what ’ in vision. Science 228, 1217 –1219 (1985). 

[4] Moran, J. & Desimone, R. Selective attention gates visual processing in the extrastriate cortex. 

Science 229, 782 –784 (1985). 

[5] Ölveczky, B. P., Baccus, S. A. & Meister, M. Segregation of object and background motion in the 

retina. Nature 423, 401 –408 (2003). 

[6] Feng S, Sun H, Yan X, et al. Dense reinforcement learning for safety validation of autonomous 

vehicles[J]. Nature, 2023, 615(7953): 620-627. 

[7] Cao, Z. et al. Continuous improvement of self-driving cars using dynamic confidence-aware 

reinforcement learning. Nat. Mach. Intell. 5, 145 –158 (2023). 

[8] Wang, Y., Yue, Y., Yue, Y. et al. Emulating human-like adaptive vision for efficient and flexible 

machine visual perception. Nat Mach Intell (2025). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-025-01130-7 

[9] Kaufmann, E. et al. Champion-level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature 620, 

982 –987 (2023). 

[10] Abdel-Aty M, Ding S. A matched case-control analysis of autonomous vs human-driven vehicle 

accidents[J]. Nature communications, 2024, 15(1): 4931. 

[11] Khanam R, Hussain M. Yolov11: An overview of the key architectural enhancements[J]. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2410.17725, 2024. 

[12] Ravi N, Gabeur V, Hu Y T, et al. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos[C]//International 

Conference on Learning Representations. 2025, 2025: 28085-28128. 

[13] Diaz-Ruiz C A, Xia Y, You Y, et al. Ithaca365: Dataset and driving perception under repeated and 

challenging weather conditions[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and 

Pattern Recognition. 2022: 21383-21392. 

[14] Yan X, Zou Z, Feng S, et al. Learning naturalistic driving environment with statistical realism[J]. 

Nature communications, 2023, 14(1): 2037. 

[15] OpenAI Gpt-4 Technical Report (OpenAI, 2023). 

[16] Li Y, Xu K, Hancke G P, et al. Color shift estimation-and-correction for image 

enhancement[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 

2024: 25389-25398. 

[17] Hu Q, Guo X. Single image reflection separation via component synergy[C]//Proceedings of the 

IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. 2023: 13138-13147. 

[18] Zhu Y, Zhao W, Li A, et al. Flowie: Efficient image enhancement via rectified 

flow[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2024: 

13-22. 

[19] Yan Q, Feng Y, Zhang C, et al. Hvi: A new color space for low-light image 

enhancement[C]//Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. 2025: 

5678-5687. 

[20] Wang W, Yang H, Fu J, et al. Zero-reference low-light enhancement via physical quadruple 

priors[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2024: 

26057-26066. 

[21] Song Z, Zhang Z, Zhang K, et al. Robust single image reflection removal against adversarial 

attacks[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2023: 

24688-24698. 

[22] Guo C, Wu R, Jin X, et al. Underwater ranker: Learn which is better and how to be 

better[C]//Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. 2023, 37(1): 702-709. 

[23] Liu Y, Jiang Q, Li X, et al. Toward better than pseudo-reference in underwater image enhancement[J]. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 2025. 

[24] Tang L, Li C, Ma J. Mask-DiFuser: A masked diffusion model for unified unsupervised image 

fusion[J]. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2025. 

[25] Tang Z, Xu T, Wu X J, et al. Revisiting rgbt tracking benchmarks from the perspective of 

modality validity: A new benchmark, problem, and solution[J]. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 

2025. 

[26] Zhu S, Zheng Z, Meng W, et al. Harnessing disordered photonics via multi-task learning towards 

intelligent four-dimensional light field sensors[J]. PhotoniX, 2023, 4(1): 26. 

[27] Bu Y, Ye T, Wang R, et al. High discrimination infrared polarimetry via intrinsic anisotropic 

photogating in black phosphorus meta-polarization detectors[J]. Nature Communications, 2025, 16(1): 

10137. 

[28] Guo Z, Tan Z, Zang X, et al. Polarization-selective unidirectional and bidirectional diffractive 

neural networks for information security and sharing[J]. Nature Communications, 2025, 16(1): 4492. 

[29] Rubin N A, D’Aversa G, Chevalier P, et al. Matrix Fourier optics enables a compact full-Stokes 

polarization camera[J]. Science, 2019, 365(6448): eaax1839. 

[30] J. Wei, Y. Chen, Y. Li, W. Li, J. Xie, J. Xie, C. Lee, K. S. Novoselov, C.-W. Qiu, Geometric 

filterless photodetectors for mid-infrared spin light. Nat. Photonics 17, 171 –178 (2023). 

[31] Lan Z, Lei Y, Chan W K E, et al. Near-infrared and visible light dual-mode organic 

photodetectors[J]. Science advances, 2020, 6(5): eaaw8065. 

[32] Ma C, Yuan S, Cheung P, et al. Intelligent infrared sensing enabled by tunable moir é quantum 

geometry[J]. Nature, 2022, 604(7905): 266-272. 

[33] Bian L, Wang Z, Zhang Y, et al. A broadband hyperspectral image sensor with high 

spatio-temporal resolution[J]. Nature, 2024, 635(8037): 73-81. 

[34] Yako M , Yamaoka Y , Kiyohara T ,et al.Video-rate hyperspectral camera based on a

CMOS-compatible random array of Fabry –Pérot filters[J].Nature Photonics, 2023, 

17(3):8.DOI:10.1038/s41566-022-01141-5. 

[35] Titze V M, Caixeiro S, Dinh V S, et al. Hyperspectral confocal imaging for high-throughput 

readout and analysis of bio-integrated microlasers[J]. Nature Protocols, 2024, 19(3): 928-959. 

[36] Tishby N, Pereira F C, Bialek W. The information bottleneck method[J]. arXiv preprint 

physics/0004057, 2000. 

[37] Ash R B. Information theory[M]. Courier Corporation, 2012. 

[38] Cez ário R R, Lopez V M, Datto-Liberato F, et al. Polarized vision in the eyes of the most effective 

predators: dragonflies and damselflies (Odonata)[J]. The Science of Nature, 2025, 112(1): 8. 

[39] Nikolaev A., Leung B., Odermatt B., Lagnado L. “Network adaptation improves temporal 

representation of naturalistic stimuli in the Drosophila eye. ” PLoS Biology, 2009 

[40] Melville-Smith A., et al. “Exploration of motion inhibition for the suppression of false positives in 

small target detection. ” Biological Cybernetics, 2022. 

[41] Gregor K., Chklovskii D.B. “A lattice filter model of the visual pathway. ” NeurIPS, 2012. 

[42] Mischiati M, Lin H T, Herold P, et al. Internal models direct dragonfly interception steering[J]. 

Nature, 2015, 517(7534): 333-338.. 

[43] Lancer B H, Evans B J E, Fabian J M, et al. Preattentive facilitation of target trajectories in a

dragonfly visual neuron[J]. Communications biology, 2022, 5(1): 829.. 

[44] Wiederman S D, Fabian J M, Dunbier J R, et al. A predictive focus of gain modulation encodes 

target trajectories in insect vision[J]. Elife, 2017, 6: e26478. 

[45] Combes S A, Salcedo M K, Pandit M M, et al. Capture success and efficiency of dragonflies 

pursuing different types of prey[J]. Integrative and comparative biology, 2013, 53(5): 787-798. 

[46] L. Yang et al., "BEVHeight++: Toward Robust Visual Centric 3D Object Detection," in IEEE 

Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 5094-5111, June 2025, doi: 

10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3549711. [47] G. Chen, P. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. He and B. Shi, "Adaptive Feature-Manipulated Vehicle and 

Pedestrian Detection in Infrared Images," in IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 

26, no. 4, pp. 4579-4591, April 2025, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2025.3545844. 

[48] Y. Zhang, J. Hou, S. Ren, J. Wu, Y. Yuan and G. Shi, "Self-Supervised Learning of LiDAR 3D 

Point Clouds via 2D-3D Neural Calibration," in IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 

Intelligence, vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 9201-9216, Oct. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3584625. 

[49] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Huang, X. Fang, M. Zhou and Y. Zhang, "AiDT: Toward Radar-Based 

Joint Anti-Interference Detection and Tracking for Weak Extended Targets Under Zero-Trust Autonomous 

Perception Tasks," in IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 41, pp. 3368-3384, 2025, doi: 

10.1109/TRO.2025.3567522. 

[50] Ikura M, Glover A, Mizuno M, et al. Lattice-allocated real-time line segment feature detection and 

tracking using only an event-based camera[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on 

Computer Vision. 2025: 4645-4654. 

[51] Farneb äck G. Two-frame motion estimation based on polynomial expansion[C]//Scandinavian 

conference on Image analysis. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003: 363-370. 

[52] Zhu K, Chen S, Shi J, et al. Localization of autonomous vehicles in tunnels based on roadside 

multi-sensor fusion[J]. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, 2024. 

[53] Tian B, Yang J, Zhang C, et al. Autonomous Driving in Underground Mines via Parallel Driving 

Operation Systems: Challenges, Frameworks and Cases Study[J]. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, 

2024. 

[54] Feng R, De Greef E, Rykunov M, et al. Multipath ghost recognition for indoor MIMO radar[J]. 

IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 2021, 60: 1-10. 

[55] Yun J S, Sim J Y. Virtual point removal for large-scale 3d point clouds with multiple glass 

planes[J]. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2019, 43(2): 729-744. 

[56] Tu Z, Ma Y, Li Z, et al. RGBT salient object detection: A large-scale dataset and benchmark[J]. 

IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 2022, 25: 4163-4176. 

[57] Gehrig D, Scaramuzza D. Low-latency automotive vision with event cameras[J]. Nature, 2024, 

629(8014): 1034-1040. 

[58] Zuo P, Wang Q, Luo Y, et al. Precise and scalable analogue matrix equation solving using resistive 

random-access memory chips[J]. Nature Electronics, 2025: 1-12. 

[59] Zhao H, Wang L, Zhou Y, et al. In situ spectral reconstruction based on a memristor chip for 

energy-efficient computational spectrometry[J]. Nature Electronics, 2026: 1-13. 

[60] Yu R, Wang Z, Liu Q, et al. A full-stack memristor-based computation-in-memory system with 

software-hardware co-development[J]. Nature Communications, 2025, 16(1): 2123. 

[61] Yao P, Wu H, Gao B, et al. Fully hardware-implemented memristor convolutional neural 

network[J]. Nature, 2020, 577(7792): 641-646. 

[62] Zhou G, Li J, Song Q, et al. Full hardware implementation of neuromorphic visual system based 

on multimodal optoelectronic resistive memory arrays for versatile image processing[J]. Nature 

communications, 2023, 14(1): 8489. 

[63] Yao M, Richter O, Zhao G, et al. Spike-based dynamic computing with asynchronous 

sensing-computing neuromorphic chip[J]. Nature communications, 2024, 15(1): 4464. 

[64] Kvatinsky S, Ramadan M, Friedman E G, et al. VTEAM: A general model for voltage-controlled 

memristors[J]. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, 2015, 62(8): 786-790.