Title: A3D: Agentic AI flow for autonomous Accelerator Design

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.15237v1

Published Time: Mon, 18 May 2026 00:03:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# A3D: Agentic AI flow for autonomous Accelerator Design 

# Abinand Nallathambi 

Purdue University West Lafayette, IN, USA 

# Christopher Knight 

Argonne National Laboratory Argonne, IL, USA 

# Shantanu Ganguly 

Unaffiliated 

# Wilfried Haensch 

University of Chicago Chicago, IL, USA 

# Anand Raghunathan 

Purdue University West Lafayette, IN, USA 

## Abstract 

Accelerating applications through the design of hardware acceler-ators can significantly enhance system performance and energy efficiency. Despite advances, such as high-level synthesis (HLS), designing accelerators for complex applications still remains highly labor-intensive, demanding considerable expertise in understanding workloads to be accelerated, hardware design, micro-architecture, and EDA tool usage, posing challenges for application domain experts. Therefore, most accelerator solutions are limited to appli-cations with a regular predictable dataflow. Advances in AI have enabled agents that perform autonomous planning, reasoning, ex-ecution and reflection, leading to unprecedented potential for au-tomation through agentic AI. We present A3D, an Agentic AI flow for end-to-end Automation of hardware Accelerator Design. A3D automates workload analysis, performance bottleneck identifica-tion, code refactoring for HLS compatibility and micro-architecture generation. A3D also generates diverse accelerator designs by au-tomatically exploring the speed-area tradeoff space. Recent efforts have explored the use of AI for specific tasks such as design space exploration in HLS, leaving several tasks to still be performed man-ually. A3D addresses the challenges in applying modern LLMs to accelerator design by judiciously partitioning tasks among spe-cialist agents, orchestrating process loops with specialist and veri-fier agents, utilizing pre-existing and custom tools, and employing agentic RAG for codebase and proprietary EDA tool documenta-tion exploration. Our implementation of A3D, using commercial components like Claude Sonnet 4.5 and the Catapult HLS tool, demonstrates its effectiveness by generating accelerator designs with no human intervention from complex scientific applications like LAMMPS (molecular dynamics simulation) and QMCPACK (quantum chemistry). 

## CCS Concepts 

• Software → Hardware tools for EDA .

## Keywords 

AI agents, EDA, Accelerator Design, High-Level Synthesis, Scien-tific computing 

## 1 Introduction 

Specialization, or the design and use of hardware accelerators, is a fundamental technique in computing system design and has the potential to speed up the execution of applications by orders of magnitude [ 4 , 8 ]. Despite the well-known potential of hardware accelerators, their use in practice tends to be limited to a few appli-cation domains (ML [ 3 , 12 ], cryptography [ 24 ], audio/video codecs) where computational kernels can be easily re-used across a wide range of workloads. The high levels of manual effort involved in designing hardware accelerators have been a significant impedi-ment to their broader use. Advances in abstraction and automation such as high-level synthesis (HLS) [ 15 , 17 ] have addressed this challenge in part by enabling software-like specifications to be converted into register-transfer level (RTL) implementations. Nev-ertheless, designing a hardware accelerator for complex application workloads still requires significant effort as the designer needs to perform various steps such as profiling the application workload to identify target kernels for acceleration, re-writing the code to separate out the identified kernels, ensuring that the kernels adhere to the subset of programming constructs and data types supported by the HLS tool, and running the HLS tool to generate the RTL implementation. Notably, these steps require designers with con-siderable expertise in hardware design, micro-architecture and HLS tool use, making them challenging for application domain experts and software developers. Recent advances in AI have led to AI agents that can autonomously set goals, plan and execute them with minimal or no human intervention [ 34 ]. These advances have enabled unprecedented levels of automation in a wide range of tasks, from generating natural language[ 36 ], images[ 2 ] and video[ 6, 27 ]to code generation[ 10 ] and even scientific research[ 18 ]. We explore the use of agentic AI to realize end-to-end automation of all the steps involved in hardware accelerator design. Realizing this vision presents significant challenges. Despite recent advances in agentic and reasoning capabilities of AI systems, the underlying large lan-guage models (LLMs) are still prone to a wide range of inadequacies such as hallucination [ 9 ], laziness and context rot[ 1 ]. Furthermore, since LLMs are trained on public data from the Internet, they are typically not exposed to the capabilities and usage of commercial EDA tools. Given the complexity of the task at hand, architecting the agentic flow in a manner that is cognizant of the limitations of artificial intelligence systems and the potential pitfalls they could face is vital to achieve reliable end-to-end automation of the ac-celerator design flow. To that end, we present A3D, an agentic AI flow for end-to-end automated accelerator design. Starting with the codebase for an application (C/C++/CUDA), A3D executes and analyzes the workload, determines kernels that are performance bottlenecks, re-factors the code to extract the identified bottleneck kernels, prepares the kernels to be HLS-ready, and runs the HLS tool to generate the micro-architectural design (register-transfer 

> arXiv:2605.15237v1 [cs.AR] 14 May 2026 Nallathambi et al.

Framework Application Analysis Workload Profiling Kernel Extraction Code Refactoring Numerics Optimization HLS Synthesis Design Space Exploration GPU Workloads 

C2HLSC [5] – – – ✓ – ✓ – –SAGE-HLS [14] – – – ✓ – – – –ChatHLS [16] – – – – – ✓ ✓ –LIFT [20] – – – – – – ✓ –LLM-DSE [29] – – – – – – ✓ –HLSPilot [31] – – – ✓ – ✓ ✓ –HLS-Repair [32] – – – ✓ ✓ ✓ – –HLSRewriter [33] – – – ✓ – ✓ – –Agentic-HLS [19] – – – – – – ✓ –

A3D (This work) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

Table 1: Coverage of HLS workflow stages across related frameworks. Existing work addresses individual downstream stages; A3D is the first to automate the full pipeline from application analysis through design space exploration. 

level) for diverse accelerator designs spanning the speed-area trade-off space. To address the aforementioned challenges, the agentic architecture of A3D has the following key features: 

• A judicious partitioning of the tasks involved in end-to-end accelerator design (workload analysis, profiling, refactor-ing for HLS compatibility, etc.) into a set of steps with a dedicated (specialist) agent assigned to each step. 

• The agents employ pre-existing tools as well as custom tools that we implemented using the model context pro-tocol (MCP) to strike a balance between using generative capabilities of the underlying LLM and the reliable function-ality of deterministic tools. This careful delineation boosts the capabilities of the agents beyond what an LLM could achieve. 

• Furthermore, each specialist agent is overseen by a dedi-cated verifier agent that iterates until the specialist agent completes the tasks correctly. 

• A3D uses agentic RAG with a two-stage retrieval pipeline using state-of-the-art embedding and reranking models to explore the codebase and proprietary EDA tool documenta-tion. 

## 2 Related Works 

Recent works have developed specialized LLM-driven frameworks targeting individual stages of the HLS-based accelerator design workflow. We organize them by the stage they address and then identify the gap that A3D fills. 

Code refactoring for synthesizability. Translating standard C/C++ into the synthesizable subset accepted by HLS tools is a labor-intensive prerequisite that several frameworks now automate. SAGE-HLS [ 14 ] fine-tunes a specialized model on a novel Verilog-to-C dataset using an AST-guided training objective, enabling the model to learn synthesis-friendly code structure rather than surface-level text patterns. C2HLSC [ 5 ] takes a tool-in-the-loop approach: it iteratively submits refactored code to the HLS compiler, parses error logs, and re-prompts the LLM until synthesis succeeds. HLS-Repair [ 32 ] similarly closes the loop with the HLS tool but addition-ally addresses numeric type optimization, converting floating-point operations to fixed-point representations to improve hardware ef-ficiency. HLSRewriter [ 33 ] extends C2HLSC’s iterative approach with a multi-pass refactoring pipeline that handles a broader set of unsupported constructs, including pointer arithmetic and dy-namic memory, achieving higher synthesis success rates. HLSDe-bugger [ 30 ] targets the downstream problem of identifying and correcting logic bugs in HLS code using LLM-based solutions. 

Design space exploration. Once a kernel is synthesizable, select-ing the right combination of optimization directives (loop unrolling factors, pipeline initiation intervals, array partitioning schemes) remains an expert-driven art due to the large design space [ 25 ]. LIFT [ 20 ] tackles this with a hybrid LLM–GNN architecture: a Graph Neural Network reasons over control and data dependencies to su-pervise the LLM’s fine-tuning for pragma insertion, substantially outperforming both heuristic-based DSE tools and naïve general-purpose LLM insertions. LLM-DSE [ 29 ] deploys a multi-agent team that collaboratively navigates the design space; the Critic agent parses HLS synthesis reports and provides natural-language feed-back to guide subsequent iterations. ChatHLS [ 16 ] separates con-cerns into an HLSFixer agent for automated error correction and an HLSTuner agent that iteratively refines pragma configurations through synthesis-report feedback. Agentic-HLS [ 19 ] combines an LLM with a GNN in a chain-of-thought reasoning framework to predict HLS quality-of-result metrics before synthesis, enabling rapid design space pruning. 

End-to-end orchestration. HLSPilot [ 31 ] is the closest prior art to A3D, orchestrating profiling, C-to-HLS translation, DSE, and host-side code generation in a four-stage pipeline augmented with retrieval-augmented generation from Xilinx Vitis documentation. However, HLSPilot, and all frameworks above, share a critical as-sumption: they begin with isolated, well-defined kernel functions where the performance bottleneck has already been extracted into a standalone test harness and are not designed to handle the complex-ity of full application analysis, kernel identification and extraction. The tasks that precede this starting point remain unaddressed in all existing frameworks: analyzing HPC-scale applications with hun-dreds of source files, profiling representative workloads, identifying bottleneck kernels buried within deep class hierarchies, resolving A3D: Agentic AI flow for autonomous Accelerator Design 

their data-structure dependencies across multiple abstraction layers, and isolating them into self-contained harnesses. Table 1 summa-rizes this coverage gap. A3D closes this gap by automating these aforementioned upstream tasks along with the downstream tasks like refactoring, HLS synthesis and design space exploration, thus achieving end-to-end automation of going from application to ac-celerator. Additionally, most scientific applications are accelerated on GPUs despite being poorly served by the programmable paral-lelism offered by GPUs and could benefit from custom accelerators. None of the existing frameworks address such scenarios, where performance bottlenecks reside in CUDA kernels. A3D is capable of handling CUDA bottlenecks and developing custom accelerator designs directly from CUDA code. 

## 3 Agentic AI flow for Accelerator Design 

In this section, we present A3D, an Agentic AI flow for Automated Accelerator Design. We present the technical details and design choices behind A3D, and how it leverages the agentic capabilities of LLMs while addressing their limitations. The A3D flow starts with the application codebase and a work-load to execute on the application, along with general natural lan-guage instructions regarding compilation, execution and environ-ment setup. An application is typically a software program that was designed to run on general-purpose computing platforms such as CPUs and GPUs. The application might contain thousands of source files typically written in a high-level programming language such as C/C++, CUDA or Python to meet the functional and perfor-mance requirements of the target domain. In this work, we focus on scientific computing applications written in C/C++ for molecular dynamics simulations and quantum chemistry. A workload is an input configuration that exercises the application to perform a spe-cific task or calculation. A workload typically contains input data files and requirements for the application to run. The workloads can vary significantly in terms of data size, complexity, and compu-tational requirements and the workloads studied in this work are typically run on high-performance computing (HPC) systems. A3D decomposes the complex process of accelerator design into three major phases, as illustrated in Figure 1: (1) the Analysis phase, where the application and workload are analyzed to identify per-formance bottlenecks and the dependencies of the bottlenecks are determined, (2) the Preparation phase, where the identified bottle-necks are isolated from the application codebase and refactored to be compatible with HLS tools, and (3) the Synthesis phase, where the prepared bottlenecks are synthesized using an HLS tool to generate hardware accelerator designs. Each phase is further decomposed into smaller manageable tasks that are assigned to specialist agents designed to perform these tasks effectively. The cross-cutting infras-tructure principles of tool augmentation, agentic RAG, adversarial verification, and orchestration are described in §3.4. 

## 3.1 Analysis Phase 

The algorithmic and computational complexity of scientific com-puting applications often lead to performance bottlenecks that limit their overall performance on programmable general-purpose com-puting platforms. These bottlenecks can arise from various factors such as complexity of algorithms, suboptimal data structures, mem-ory access patterns, and unsuitability for the traditional SIMD or SIMT parallelism paradigms employed by CPUs and GPUs. Identi-fying these bottlenecks and building accelerators to offload them can significantly improve the overall performance of the appli-cation. However, identifying these bottlenecks in large complex applications is a challenging task that requires expertise in both the application domain and software development, as the bottle-necks can be deeply embedded within the application codebase with complex dependencies. A3D addresses this challenge with three specialist agents that work in sequence to identify the bottlenecks effectively. The first agent, the Workload Analyst , analyzes the application codebase us-ing semantic search and the workload to develop an understanding of the application’s functionality and the workload’s characteristics. The second agent, the Performance Profiler , uses a profiling tool like gprof to profile the application with the given workload and identify the functions that consume the most execution time. The third agent, the Bottleneck Analyst , builds on the insights from the previous two agents to analyze the identified performance-critical functions and identify their dependencies within the application codebase. Determining the list of data structure dependencies is critical for accurate implementation of the bottleneck kernels. In order to ensure that the Bottleneck Analyst can reliably and repeat-ably produce the exhaustive list of dependencies, a static analysis tool is implemented using CodeQL. The Bottleneck Analyst uses said codeQLAnalysis tool to perform static analysis of the code-base and identify the data structure and function dependencies of the performance-critical functions. The Bottleneck Analyst then produces a detailed report that summarizes the identified bottle-necks and provide valuable insights into the data types, sizes, and structures used by these performance-critical functions. 

## 3.2 Preparation Phase 

High level synthesis is a widely used methodology for designing hardware accelerators from high-level programming languages such as C/C++. HLS tools can automatically generate hardware description language (HDL) code from high-level C/C++ code, sig-nificantly reducing the development time and effort required for hardware design. However, HLS tools typically support only a sub-set of the C/C++ language features and constructs, and certain programming patterns may not be synthesizable. The performance bottlenecks identified in the previous step can be expected to be highly optimized for the target general-purpose computing plat-form, and thus, may use complex programming constructs and pat-terns that are not compatible with HLS tools like multi-dimensional pointers, dynamic memory, STL containers etc. Therefore, the iden-tified bottlenecks must be refactored to ensure compatibility with HLS tools while preserving their functionality. A3D addresses this challenge with a three step process. The first step involves the Snapshot Engineer agent that utilizes the data structure dependencies identified by the Bottleneck Analyst to take snapshots of the input and output datastructures of the bottleneck functions during workload execution. The second step involves the 

Harness Developer agent that implements an isolated test harness for the bottleneck function and validates its correctness using the Nallathambi et al. 

input and output snapshots generated in the previous step. The test harness provides a controlled environment for testing and validat-ing the bottleneck function, ensuring that it behaves as expected when refactored and optimized for HLS. The snapshot engineer and harness developer agents are designed to work in collaboration, with the snapshot engineer providing the necessary data structure coverage so that the harness developer can implement an effective test harness. If any discrepancies are found during validation, the agents iteratively refine data capture and test harness implementa-tion until numerical correctness is achieved. The third step involves the HLS Preparer agent that refactors the bottleneck function to ensure compatibility with HLS tools, by replacing unsupported programming constructs. Moreover, HLS tools provide their own libraries for optimized implementations of floating and fixed-point number formats, mathematical functions, and data structures. The HLS Preparer agent uses its agentic RAG capabilities (§3.4) to understand the HLS-optimized counterparts of the number formats and math functions used in the bottleneck func-tion. These necessary refactorings are quite complex and require deep understanding of both the algorithmic needs of the application and HLS tool capabilities. Therefore, A3D breaks down the HLS preparation task into smaller manageable sub-tasks, each handled by dedicated specialist agents. The HLS Preparer agent orchestrates this process by collaborating with the specialist agents. For ex-ample, Figure 2 illustrates how an HLS Preparer agent refactors standard floating point data types to HLS-compatible data types by performing a natural language query to identify the appropriate replacements. To further streamline this process, AST-based tools (§3.4) automate common refactorings such as pointer to array con-versions and literal typecastings. Specialist agents leverage these tools to perform the required refactorings in a systematic manner. At the end of the preparation phase, A3D produces an HLS-compatible version of the bottleneck function, with statically de-fined data structures and HLS-compatible number formats and math functions, along with a validated test harness for the function. 

Workload Analyst   

> •Characterizes workload configuration and parameters
> •Maps application entry points and execution flow

Profiler    

> •Builds codebase
> •Executes workload
> •Produces execution traces and profiles

Bottleneck Analyst   

> •Studies bottleneck kernels
> •Produces the data structure footprint

Analysis 

Workload 

Codebase 

Instructions 

Snapshot Engineer   

> •Instruments code to capture i/o traces during execution
> •Executes to produce i/o snapshots

Harness Developer   

> •Instruments an isolated test harness
> •Builds and executes to validate with snapshots

HLS Preparer  

> •Refactors harnessed kernel to adhere to synthesizable subset of programming con-structs

Preparation 

Numerics Explorer   

> •Optimizes number formats and bit-widths
> •Validates with i/o snapshots

Synthesizer   

> •Invokes HLS tool to synthe-size the kernel
> •Reads logs and iterates

DSE   

> •Reads docs and kernel code to enumerate a design space
> •Performs grid search and produces latency-area Pareto front

Synthesis 

(a) End-to-end agentic flow 

General Tools      

> •Read file
> •Write file
> •List files
> •Execute command
> •Regex search

Specialized Tools 

> $ gprof

Agent  

> tool use
> embed
> code docs
> Vector database
> re-ranker
> query response

2-stage RAG 

(b) Agent infrastructure 

> Results
> latency
> area

(c) Design space explo-ration results 

Figure 1: A3D: Agentic AI flow for Accelerator Design. (a) End-to-end multi-agent pipeline spanning three phases: Analysis, Preparation, and Synthesis (b) Shared agent infrastructure including general-purpose and specialized tools alongside a two-stage RAG pipeline over the codebase and EDA tool documentation. (c) Latency–area design space produced by the DSE agent providing a diverse set of Pareto-optimal accelerator designs. A3D: Agentic AI flow for autonomous Accelerator Design         

> typedef double real_t; real_t calc_KE(real_t m, real_t v) {return 0.5 * m * v * v; }
> HLS Preparer
> typedef ac_ieee_float<binary64> real_t; real_t calc_KE(real_t m, real_t v) {return real_t(0.5) * m * v * v; }
> embed
> Catapult docs
> Vector DB
> re-ranker
> query
> response
> What is the ac_types
> equivalent of double ?
> Results:
> •Chunk 0: ac_std_float...
> •Chunk 1: ac_ieee_float...
> •Chunk 2: ac_float...

Figure 2: HLS Preparer agent refactoring floating-point types to HLS-compatible types via agentic RAG. The agent queries the Catapult documentation vector database for the ac_types 

equivalent of double and rewrites the source code with the retrieved replacement. 

## 3.3 Synthesis Phase 

One of the key advantages of building custom hardware acceler-ators is the ability to choose number formats and bitwidths that are tailored to the application’s requirements and to build the nec-essary data paths and compute units accordingly. This flexibility allows for significant improvements in performance, area, and en-ergy efficiency compared to general-purpose computing platforms that use fixed number formats and bitwidths. Thus, as part of the HLS phase, the Numerics Explorer agent explores different num-ber formats and bitwidths for each data element in the bottleneck function with the goal of minimizing bitwidths while preserving the functional correctness of the application. While the numerics explorer takes a trial-and-error approach in this work by iteratively reducing the bitwidths, it should be feasible to create tools based on formal methods that the agent can leverage to perform this task more systematically. Once the number formats and bitwidths have been determined, the Synthesizer agent performs high-level synthesis of the prepared bottleneck function using the Catapult HLS tool. In case of synthe-sis failures, the synthesizer agent analyzes the synthesis reports and error logs, identifies the root causes of the failures, and finds ap-propriate solutions using its agentic RAG capabilities to explore the HLS tool documentation. The synthesizer agent iteratively refines the HLS-compatible code to achieve successful synthesis. HLS tools provide several optimization directives, such as loop unrolling, pipelining, and array partitioning, that can be used to explore the speed-area tradeoff space of potential hardware ac-celerator designs. The Design Space Enumerator agent studies the bottleneck code and the optimization directives supported by the HLS tool to enumerate a diverse set of optimization directives and their configurations that can be applied to the bottleneck function during synthesis. The DSE agent encodes its analysis into a structured YAML spec-ification that declaratively describes the optimization dimensions (e.g., design goal, clock period, loop unrolling factors) and their option values, along with any implied constraints such as memory interleaving requirements. A3D provides DSE generation tools that parse this YAML specification, perform combinatorial expansion across all dimensions, and emit one HLS directive (Tcl) file per design point along with a summary manifest. This deterministic tool chain ensures that every generated configuration is syntacti-cally correct, a task that would be highly error-prone if performed generatively by the LLM across hundreds of configurations. A grid search is then performed by synthesizing every design point, reporting the performance and area metrics for each, and extracting the Pareto-optimal set of designs. A3D provides a DSE ex-ecution tool that manages the parallel synthesis of all design points, handling job scheduling across local and remote compute nodes, Catapult invocation with the appropriate directive file for each design point, and log collection. The grid search is embarrassingly parallel and provides complete coverage of the feasibility bound-ary between viable and infeasible designs. A3D currently employs this grid search strategy for design space exploration, but more advanced techniques such as Bayesian optimization [ 26 ] or evolu-tionary algorithms [ 25 ] can be integrated into the DSE execution tool to improve the efficiency of design space exploration. 

## 3.4 Agent Infrastructure 

The specialist agents described above are supported by a shared in-frastructure layer comprising custom tools, an agentic RAG pipeline, adversarial verification loops, and a top-level orchestrator. This in-frastructure is critical to achieving reliable end-to-end automation despite the inherent limitations of LLMs. 

3.4.1 Custom and Pre-existing Tools. The agents leverage general-purpose tools for file system exploration, reading and writing to files, and running shell commands. A3D also invokes pre-existing tools such as gprof for profiling and the Catapult HLS tool for high-level synthesis. Additionally, A3D implements task-specific custom tools (Table 2) for code analysis using CodeQL, code refactoring us-ing Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) transformations and helper tools for performing design space exploration. These tools provide determin-istic, repeatable transformations that complement the generative capabilities of the LLM agents, eliminating a significant source of errors in mechanical code transformations. 

3.4.2 Agentic RAG Pipeline. A3D employs a two-stage retrieval pipeline to enable agentic RAG capabilities for the agents to se-mantically explore the application codebase and the proprietary EDA tool documentation. For example, when an agent encounters an unfamiliar construct or needs to identify the HLS-compatible counterpart of a standard library function, it issues a natural lan-guage query that is converted into an embedding, matched against vector databases populated with the codebase and tool documenta-tion, and re-ranked for relevance. The top results are provided to Nallathambi et al. 

Table 2: Custom tools implemented for A3D. These tools provide deterministic, repeatable transformations that com-plement the generative capabilities of the LLM agents.             

> Tool Phase Function
> codeQLAnalysis Analysis Static analysis of codebase to extract data-structure and function dependen-cies of bottleneck kernels
> staticMem Preparation AST-based conversion of dynamic mem-ory (multidimensional pointers, new[] )to statically-sized C-style arrays with compile-time constants
> literal-Typecast
> Preparation AST-based insertion of explicit type casts on all numeric literals to prevent implicit conversion ambiguities
> genDSE Synthesis Parses YAML design space specifica-tion, performs combinatorial expansion across all dimensions, emits per-design-point Tcl directive files
> runDSE Synthesis Parallel synthesis execution across lo-cal and remote compute nodes with job scheduling, failover, and log collection

Task description 

Specialist Verifier 

Task Success 

Task Complete 

Task Failure 

Figure 3: Specialist–Verifier iterative process loop. The veri-fier adversarially evaluates the specialist’s deliverables and returns critical feedback on errors or shortcomings, looping until quality standards are met. 

the agent as context for the assigned task. This pipeline is essen-tial for bridging the gap between the LLM’s training data and the proprietary knowledge required for hardware design. 

3.4.3 Specialist–Verifier Loop. Given the complexity of the tasks involved in accelerator design and the stochastic nature of LLMs, it is inevitable that the outputs produced by the specialist agents may contain errors or may not meet the desired quality standards or may not meet the expected list of deliverables. To add robustness to the A3D flow and eliminate the need for human intervention, A3D employs an iterative process loop with specialist and verifier agents. Verifier agents are designed to adversarially evaluate the outputs produced by specialist agents, identify any errors, shortcomings or false claims, and provide critical feedback to the specialist agents for task resumption and refinement. Figure 3 illustrates this process loop. The transitions between the specialist and verifier agents are automatic and the loop continues until the verifier agent validates that the deliverables produced by the specialist agent meet the desired outcomes. While this process loop can potentially lead to longer task completion times due to multiple iterations, we empiri-cally find that it significantly improves the quality of the outputs and significantly reduces the need for human intervention. 

3.4.4 Orchestration. To orchestrate this end-to-end flow with full autonomy, A3D employs the Interfacer agent, the top-level orches-trator. The Interfacer sequences the three phases, passes accumu-lated context (analysis reports, extracted artifacts, validation re-sults) from one phase to the next, and re-invokes specialist agents as required. Crucially, the Interfacer operates at the phase level; within each phase, individual agents may themselves coordinate sub-tasks (as described above for HLS preparation), but the Inter-facer is responsible for the overall flow progression and inter-phase handoff. 

## 4 Results 

In this section, we present the results of evaluating A3D. First, we characterize the benchmarks and the complexity of the kernels identified by A3D from real-world scientific applications (§4.1). We then present the end-to-end pipeline results (§4.2) demonstrating that A3D autonomously transforms complex scientific codebases into synthesized hardware accelerator designs, and compare A3D-generated accelerator designs against an edge GPU (§4.3). Next, we present a rigorous ablation study that quantifies the contribution of each architectural layer in A3D’s HLS preparation phase (§4.4), and finally walk through the end-to-end agentic flow qualitatively (§4.5). 

## 4.1 Benchmarks and Kernel Characteristics 

We evaluate A3D on two flagship scientific computing applica-tions: LAMMPS [ 28 ], a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation toolkit, and QMCPACK [ 13 ], a quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) application. LAMMPS simulates systems of atoms that interact with each other through force functions called interatomic potentials : at each timestep the simulator evaluates forces on every atom and updates their po-sitions. The force evaluation is the most computationally expensive step and the primary target for hardware acceleration. QMCPACK simulates the behavior of electrons in materials by stochastically sampling a mathematical function (the wavefunction ) that describes the quantum state of the system; the computational cost is domi-nated by evaluating particle–particle interaction energies across the simulated system. Both applications are large-scale C++ code-bases with hundreds of source files, deep class hierarchies, and pervasive use of dynamic memory, templates, and pointer-based data structures. These are representative of the software complexity that A3D is designed to handle. We use representative workloads for both applications, scaled down to run on a single CPU core for the purpose of demonstrating the full workflow. 

4.1.1 LAMMPS Kernels. Five LAMMPS workloads were selected to span a progression of interatomic potential complexity: lj , eam ,

rhodo , snap , and reaxff . The simplest ( lj ) computes forces based A3D: Agentic AI flow for autonomous Accelerator Design 

only on the distance between pairs of atoms; the most complex (reaxff ) models the formation and breaking of chemical bonds, re-quiring interactions that simultaneously involve four atoms. The performance-critical kernels identified by A3D span two fundamen-tal tasks: force evaluation and neighbor-list construction. 

PairLJCut::Compute() evaluates the Lennard-Jones pair po-tential, the simplest widely-used force function, where the force between two atoms depends only on their distance. A cutoff dis-tance is imposed so that only nearby pairs interact, which avoids the 𝑂 (𝑁 2) cost of evaluating all pairs but requires a neighbor list 

data structure that records, for each atom, which other atoms are close enough to interact. The kernel iterates over each atom’s neigh-bor list, an irregular, input-dependent data structure, computing pairwise distances, forces, and energies. A physics symmetry (equal and opposite forces between each pair) halves the computation but introduces concurrent read-modify-write updates to force arrays, and the distance-based cutoff leads to irregular control flow. This kernel dominates the execution time in the lj workload. 

NPairBin::Build() constructs the neighbor list itself, a spa-tial indexing structure shared by all force-evaluation kernels. The algorithm partitions the simulation domain into spatial bins and, for each atom, tests candidates from adjacent bins against a dis-tance threshold. This kernel is characterized by multi-level pointer indirection ( int** neighbor arrays with runtime-determined di-mensions), dynamic output sizes (each atom has a different number of neighbors depending on local conditions), and indirect mem-ory addressing through bin-to-atom mappings. It is the dominant bottleneck in the eam workload (which simulates metallic systems where force computation is less expensive relative to neighbor-list construction) and the rhodo workload (which simulates a biological protein). 

SNA::compute_uarray() computes mathematical descriptors of each atom’s local neighborhood for a machine-learned force function (SNAP). Instead of using a fixed formula, SNAP uses de-scriptors that are projections of the neighbor arrangement onto a set of basis functions as inputs to a learned model that predicts forces. The descriptor computation involves deeply nested loops over basis function indices, with complex-valued arithmetic and transcendental functions ( sin , cos ) in the inner loop. A configu-ration parameter ( twojmax = 8) directly controls the loop depth and, consequently, the computational intensity. While compact in source lines, the mathematical density and loop nesting make this kernel a challenging target for HLS. 

ReaxFF::Torsion_Angles() evaluates the energy contribution from groups of four bonded atoms in a reactive force field that can model the formation and breaking of chemical bonds. This capability requires tracking the bonding state of every atom and evaluating multi-body interaction terms (two-body, three-body, and four-body). The torsion angle term computes the energy penalty for deviations from preferred dihedral angles across four bonded atoms ( 𝑖 -𝑗 -𝑘 -𝑙 ). Because bonds can form and break during the simu-lation, the set of valid four-atom groups is determined dynamically from the evolving bond topology, producing a four-deep nested loop hierarchy: the outermost loop iterates over all 2,048 atoms, the second over each atom’s bond partners ( ∼20 per atom), the third over angle partners ( ∼10), and the innermost over torsion partners (∼10). The innermost loop body contains ∼200 floating-point op-erations including transcendental functions. The kernel exhibits K=4 windowed memory access patterns on the atom position array (simultaneously accessing atoms 𝑖 , 𝑗 , 𝑘 , and 𝑙 ), accumulator depen-dencies on force and energy arrays, and indirect indexing through bond and interaction lists with runtime-determined bounds. This combination of deep nesting, irregular memory access, and accu-mulation patterns makes it among the most challenging kernels for HLS synthesis considered to-date. 

4.1.2 QMCPACK Kernels. QMCPACK uses a stochastic algorithm to compute the energy of electrons in a material. A key computa-tional challenge is evaluating the electrostatic interaction between charged particles: because this interaction extends to infinite range (unlike the cutoff-based forces in LAMMPS), it cannot be computed by simply summing over nearby pairs. Instead, the interaction is calculated through Ewald summation, which splits it into a short-range part (handled in real space) and a long-range part (handled in frequency space via Fourier transforms). The two kernels iden-tified by A3D both arise from the frequency-space (long-range) part of this computation. Rather than targeting the dense linear algebra (BLAS) operations that dominate many quantum chemistry codes, we prioritize these non-BLAS-like kernels with irregular computation patterns to better demonstrate the breadth of A3D’s capabilities. 

LRHandlerBase::Evaluate() computes the long-range energy contribution. The Fourier-space coefficients are pre-computed; the kernel itself is a pure accumulation loop that computes weighted dot products of pre-computed arrays grouped into shells of varying size. For each shell, the inner loop accumulates element-wise products across a variable number of elements, and the outer loop multiplies each shell’s sum by a pre-computed weight. 

StructFact::computeRhok() computes the frequency-space representation of the particle distribution, which serves as the input to the energy evaluation above. For each particle, the ker-nel computes the dot product of the particle’s position with each frequency-space vector, evaluates cosine - sine pairs of the re-sult, and accumulates the complex exponential into per-species output arrays. The kernel processes frequency-space vectors in blocks of 512, with the block count and final block size determined at runtime. The HLS challenges include CORDIC-based transcen-dental functions, species-based indirect write targeting (a particle’s species ID determines which output array receives the accumula-tion), and data-dependent loop bounds with early-exit semantics for the blocked processing. 

4.1.3 Comparison with Prior Work. Beyond the workflow coverage gap discussed in §2 (Table 1), the kernels themselves present qual-itatively different challenges from the benchmarks used by prior LLM-driven HLS frameworks. C2HLSC [ 5 ], SAGE-HLS [ 14 ], HLSPi-lot [ 31 ], LIFT [ 20 ], and LLM-DSE [ 29 ] are evaluated on isolated benchmark kernels drawn from suites such as Polybench, Mach-Suite [ 22 ], and CHStone [ 7 ]. These benchmarks typically consist of compact loop nests with regular, statically determinable access patterns, fixed array dimensions, and no external data structure dependencies. Nallathambi et al. 

Table 3: End-to-end pipeline results for all kernels processed by A3D. Each kernel was autonomously taken through the full A3D flow, spanning workload analysis, bottleneck identification, code refactoring, HLS synthesis, and design space exploration, with zero human intervention.                                           

> Kernel App DSE points Successful syntheses Synthesis Success Rate Pareto-optimal designs
> PairLJCut::Compute() LAMMPS 1080 61 5.6% 8
> NPairBin::Build() LAMMPS 240 136 56.7% 15
> SNA::compute_uarray() LAMMPS 180 61 33.9% 11
> ReaxFF::Torsion_Angles() LAMMPS 648 109 16.8% 7
> PairEAM::Compute() LAMMPS 504 72 14.3% 7
> PairLJCut::k_lj_fast() LAMMPS 486 295 60.7% 16
> StructFact::computeRhok() QMCPACK 384 289 75.3% 15
> LRHandlerBase::Evaluate() QMCPACK 54 49 90.7% 13

In contrast, the kernels processed by A3D exhibit several di-mensions of complexity absent from these benchmark suites. Data-structure depth: functions operate on class member variables ac-cessed through multi-level pointer indirection (up to ****fbp in ReaxFF), arrays of nested structs containing struct members (e.g., 

bond_data embedding a bond_order_data struct with 20 fields), and complex data dependencies. Runtime-determined sizing: array dimensions are not compile-time constants but are derived from simulation parameters, requiring snapshot-based size discovery and static over-provisioning (e.g., 168 atoms → 2,048-element arrays). 

Incompatible programming patterns: the kernels make heavy use of dynamic memory allocation, pointer arithmetic, STL containers, and virtual dispatch. These patterns are fundamentally incompati-ble with HLS tools and require systematic refactoring across dozens of constructs. GPU-native workloads: one kernel ( k_lj_fast ) was extracted from a CUDA implementation, requiring translation of GPU-specific idioms (thread indexing, shared memory, warp-level operations) into HLS-compatible sequential C++. 

## 4.2 End-to-End Pipeline Results 

A3D successfully processed all seven kernels identified in §4.1 through the complete pipeline with no human intervention. Table 3 presents a comprehensive summary of the end-to-end pipeline re-sults for each kernel, spanning all three phases of the A3D flow: the analysis phase (bottleneck identification and dependency ex-traction), the preparation phase (snapshot capture, harness devel-opment, and HLS-compatible refactoring), and the synthesis phase (numerics optimization, HLS synthesis, and design space explo-ration). 

4.2.1 Implementation. The agents in A3D are implemented using the Roo Code agent development toolkit [ 23 ], which provides a framework for building and executing agentic workflows. While Roo Code supports choosing the underlying LLM for each agent, we use Claude Sonnet 4.5 as the underlying LLM for all agents in A3D due to its strong reasoning and code generation capabilities. The agentic RAG pipeline is implemented using state-of-the-art embed-ding and re-ranking models [ 35 ], and vector databases. When the agent makes an enquiry, it is converted into a 4096-dimensional em-bedding using Qwen3-Embedding-8B. This embedding is then used to retrieve the top-k cosine-similar chunks from vector databases that have been populated with the codebase and the EDA tool doc-umentation, respectively. The retrieved chunks are then re-ranked using Qwen3-Reranker-8B to reorder them based on their relevance to the original query. The top-m re-ranked chunks are then pro-vided to the agent as context for the assigned task. The HLS tool used in A3D is the Catapult HLS tool from Siemens, a widely used commercial HLS tool that supports C++ input and generates RTL implementations. 

4.2.2 Design Space Exploration. A3D automatically identifies op-timization opportunities for each kernel, such as loop unrolling, loop pipelining, and array partitioning factors, alongside global synthesis settings like target clock period and optimization goals (speed vs. area), and enumerates a combinatorial design space from these dimensions. Each design point is synthesized independently and a Pareto-optimal set of designs is extracted. Across all eight kernels, A3D enumerated a total of 3,216 design points and success-fully synthesized 1,036 of them, yielding 92 Pareto-optimal designs (Table 3). Synthesis success rates vary widely across kernels, ranging from 5.6% to 90.7%. The variation is driven primarily by memory in-terface complexity: kernels with many distinct arrays requiring simultaneous access (e.g., PairLJCut accesses over a dozen arrays including position, force, neighbor lists, and coefficient tables, each requiring independent memory ports under unrolling or pipelining) have a larger fraction of infeasible configurations, while kernels with fewer arrays and more regular access patterns achieve higher success rates. The two QMCPACK kernels consistently achieve higher synthesis rates (75.3% and 90.7%) than the LAMMPS ker-nels, reflecting their simpler data structure dependencies and more regular memory access patterns. 

## 4.3 Accelerator vs. Edge GPU Comparison 

To demonstrate the practical value of A3D-generated accelerators, we compare them against an edge GPU. A3D processed the GPU-accelerated LAMMPS workload, identified the k_lj_fast() CUDA kernel, which accelerates the Lennard-Jones computation with GPUs, and generated accelerator designs through its full pipeline. A3D successfully re-implemented the CUDA kernel into an HLS-compatible C++ kernel, thus enabling the direct integration of the generated accelerator into the original GPU-accelerated execution A3D: Agentic AI flow for autonomous Accelerator Design 

Table 4: Comparison of A3D-generated accelerator designs against the NVIDIA Jetson AGX Orin for the PairLJCut ker-nel. A3D power and EDP are scaled from 22 nm to 8 nm ( 0.30 ×

power factor) for an iso-technology comparison.               

> Platform Latency Power EDP
> Jetson AGX Orin 2.1 ms 3.6 W 15.9 𝜇 Js A3D Design (low latency) 7.85 ms 1.04 W 64.1 𝜇 Js A3D Design (low power) 618 ms 0.87 W 0.33 Js

flow. This demonstrates A3D’s ability to accelerate workloads that are already accelerated on GPUs, which is a common scenario in scientific computing where researchers often use GPU-accelerated libraries but still face bottlenecks, as the irregular compute patterns of these kernels make them a poor fit for GPU acceleration. The generated accelerators were synthesized using the 22 nm technology from Global Foundries. An data-driven architecture simulator was implemented to estimate latency and energy con-sumption of each design point. Since the Jetson AGX Orin uses Samsung’s 8 nm process, we scale the A3D power figures to 8 nm using a conservative 0.30 × factor. The results are summarized in Table 4. The A3D low-latency design achieves a power consumption of 1.04 W—a 3.5× power advantage over the Jetson’s 3.6 W—with a comparable energy per execution (8.2 mJ vs. 7.6 mJ) and an EDP of 64.1 𝜇 Js compared to the Jetson’s 15.9 𝜇 Js. The remaining latency and EDP gap is driven by the Jetson’s higher degree of parallelism. The fastest A3D design occupies only 49,494 𝜇 m2, which is a small fraction of the area of the Orin SoC. Crucially, these accelerator designs were generated with zero human intervention from a CUDA kernel, which is a novel capability. 

## 4.4 Ablation Study: Impact of Agentic Scaffolding 

A central claim of A3D is that its multi-layered agentic architecture, comprising task decomposition into specialist agents, augmentation with custom tools, and adversarial verification loops, is essential for reliable agentic hardware generation. To rigorously validate this claim, we conduct an ablation study on the PairLJCut::Compute() 

kernel from LAMMPS, measuring the success rate of the HLS prepa-ration phase under four progressively richer agent design configu-rations. 

4.4.1 Experimental Design. We define four ablation configurations, each adding one architectural layer atop the previous: 

• Config A — Monolithic Agent: A single monolithic HLS Preparer agent performs all preparation tasks without task decomposition. 

• Config B — Multi-Agent: The preparation task is de-composed into six sequential phases, each handled by a dedicated specialist agent coordinated by an orchestrator: (0) datastructure pruning, (1) memory interface refactoring, (2) type conversion to ac_types , (3) loop labeling for HLS directives, (4) math function replacement with ac_math 

equivalents, and (5) construct verification and cleanup. 

Table 5: Bayesian posterior analysis of success rates across ablation configurations. 𝑛 : completed trials, 𝑘 : passed trials, CI: 95% credible interval.                                 

> Config 𝑛 𝑘 Pass Rate Post. Mean 95% CI 𝑃 (𝜃 >90 )
> (A) Monolithic 75 24 32.0 32.5 [22.5, 43.3] 0.0 (B) Multi-Agent 73 42 57.5 57.3 [46.1, 68.2] 0.0 (C) + Tools 60 45 75.0 74.2 [62.7, 84.2] 0.0 (D) + Verifiers 30 29 96.7 93.8 [83.3, 99.2] 0.83

• Config C — Agents + AST Tools: Along with the multi-agent decomposition, we integrate AST-based tools for de-terministic code transformations to augment the agents’ ca-pabilities. Agent 1 invokes the staticMem tool for kernel in-terface refactoring and Agent 2 invokes the literalTypecast 

tool for systematic typecasting of numeric literals. 

• Config D — Agents + Tools + Verifiers: The full A3D architecture comprising of decomposed specialist agents augmented with AST tools along with an adversarial verifi-cation loop for each specialist phase. After each specialist agent completes its task, a dedicated verifier agent performs targeted checks to identify any errors or omissions in the expected deliverables of that phase, providing feedback for iterative refinement until the specialist’s output passes all verification checks. For each configuration, we execute 𝑛 independent trials using identical inputs (the isolated PairLJCut::Compute() test harness implemented by Harness Developer and I/O snapshots produced by the Snapshot Engineer). Each trial is validated by a three-stage short-circuit evaluation pipeline: (1) compile : the refactored ker-nel and test harness must compile without errors, (2) execute : the compiled harness must run and produce outputs that match the golden outputs, and (3) synthesize : the HLS tool must successfully synthesize the refactored kernel. A trial passes only if all three stages succeed; evaluation halts at the first failure. We model the success rate using a Beta–Binomial Bayesian framework with a uniform Beta (1, 1) prior, employing adaptive stopping based on posterior precision ( ±12 .5% ) and success ( 𝑃 (𝜃 > 90% ) > 0.9)/futility (𝑃 (𝜃 < 10% ) > 0.33 ) thresholds. We use Qwen3.5-27B [ 21 ] for all agents in this ablation study to isolate the impact of architectural design choices from model capabilities. We note that Qwen3.5-27B is a state-of-the-art LLM with strong reasoning and code generation capabilities scoring 72.4% on SWE-bench-Verified [ 11 ] vs. Claude Sonnet 4.5’s 71.4%. 

4.4.2 Success Rate Analysis. Figure 4 presents the posterior mean success rate for each configuration with 95% credible intervals. The results show a clear upward staircase as A3D features are added. Table 5 presents the full Bayesian analysis. The posterior mean success rate increases from 32.5% (Config A) to 93.8% (Config D), with each architectural layer contributing a substantial improve-ment. Notably, only the full A3D architecture (Config D) achieves a nonzero probability of exceeding a 90% success rate ( 𝑃 (𝜃 > 90% ) =

0.83 ), while all other configurations have effectively zero probability of reaching this threshold. Nallathambi et al.   

> Success Rate (%)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> (A) Monolithic Agent
> 24/75
> (B) Multi-Agent
> 42/73
> (C) + AST Tools
> 45/60
> (D) + Verifier Loops
> 29/30
> decompose tooling verify

Figure 4: Success rates for the HLS preparation phase under four ablation configurations. Bar heights indicate the raw pass rate ( 𝑘 /𝑛 ); dashed lines mark the Bayesian posterior mean; error bars show 95% credible intervals. Each layer of A3D’s architecture—task decomposition (A →B), tool augmen-tation (B →C), and verification loops (C →D)—contributes a measurable improvement in reliability. 

Going from Config A to Config B demonstrates the value of 

task decomposition : the pass rate nearly doubles from 32.0% to 57.5%. A monolithic agent cannot manage the cognitive complexity of refactoring 35 unsupported constructs across nearly 1500 AST nodes within a single context window, frequently triggering con-text condensation and losing track of earlier transformations or introducing inconsistencies. The improvement from Config B to Config C validates tool augmentation : the pass rate rises from 57.5% to 75.0%. While LLMs can attempt code transformations like literal typecasting and pointer-to-array conversion generatively, the AST-based tools handle these transformations deterministically and reliably, eliminating a significant source of errors. Finally, the gain from Config C to Config D validates the specialist–verifier loop :the pass rate jumps from 75.0% to 96.7%. Adversarial verification catches subtle errors that specialist agents miss, such as incomplete transformations. This final layer ultimately pushes A3D into the high-reliability regime, as reflected by the 𝑃 (𝜃 > 90% ) = 0.83 in Config D versus zero for all other configurations. 

4.4.3 Cost–Efficiency Analysis. While simpler configurations are cheaper, they are less reliable. Table 6 presents the mean cost and efficiency metrics for each configuration. Mean per-trial cost in-creases monotonically from $2.65 (Config A) to $7.33 (Config D), driven primarily by higher token consumption. Config D processes 23M input tokens and 171K output tokens per trial, roughly 2.5 ×

and 3 × that of Config A, respectively. The higher token counts reflect the overhead of multi-agent coordination, tool invocations, and verifier feedback loops. The cost per successful outcome (mean cost divided by pass rate) is minimized by Config C at $5.43, owing to its arsenal of tools. Config D incurs a higher cost per success ($7.58) due to verifier loop overhead. However, reliability is paramount for end-to-end automation, and Config D is the only configuration for which 𝑃 (𝜃 >

90% ) > 0, indicating that the verifier loop is necessary to achieve high-confidence automation. At a 75% pass rate (Config C), one in four runs requires human intervention; at 97% (Config D), this drops to approximately one in thirty-three, a reduction that is critical for unmanned deployment. We report that the observations from this ablation study guided the design of A3D’s architecture based on all three principles of task decomposition, tool augmentation, and verification loops to achieve similar levels of reliability at every step of the A3D workflow. 

4.4.4 Verifier Loop Behavior. To understand where the verifier loop’s overhead materializes, we parse the agent execution traces from Config D into specialist episodes , defined as the subsequence of mode transitions between when the orchestrator dispatches to a specialist and when control returns to the orchestrator. For each of the six preparation phases, we measure the number of verifier rounds (specialist →verifier transitions) per episode and the single-pass rate : the fraction of episodes in which the specialist’s output was accepted by the verifier on the first attempt. Table 7 presents the per-phase results across all 30 completed Config D trials. Phases 0 (datastructure pruning), 3 (loop labeling), and 5 (construct verification) achieve a 100% single-pass rate: the verifier never rejects the specialist’s output. Phase 4 (math func-tion replacement) is nearly as stable at 96.7%, with only one trial requiring a second verifier round. In contrast, Phases 1 (memory interface refactoring) and 2 (type conversion) both achieve a 76.7% single-pass rate, with Phase 2 exhibiting the highest maximum verifier rounds (3) and transitions (6) of any phase. These phases involve the most complex, multi-site code transformations: con-verting multi-level pointer indirection to static arrays (Phase 1) and replacing all numeric types with HLS-compatible ac_types 

(Phase 2). 

Table 6: Cost and efficiency metrics across ablation configurations. Cost per success is computed as mean cost / pass rate.                                        

> Config 𝑛 𝑘 Mean Cost ($) Total Cost ($) Mean Time (min) Mean Tokens In Mean Tokens Out Mean API Calls Cost per Success ($)
> (A) Monolithic 75 24 2.65 198.75 12m13s 9,311,098 58,166 86 9.17 (B) Multi-Agent 73 42 3.66 267.18 20m0s 11,479,576 91,715 169 6.37 (C) + Tools 60 45 4.07 244.20 23m20s 12,662,270 112,522 191 5.43 (D) + Verifiers 30 29 7.33 219.90 37m19s 23,071,153 170,735 303 7.58 A3D: Agentic AI flow for autonomous Accelerator Design

Table 7: Per-phase verifier loop behavior in Config D (30 tri-als). Single-pass rate: fraction of episodes where the verifier accepted the specialist’s output on the first attempt.                    

> Phase Mean Verifier Rounds Max Verifier Rounds Single-Pass Rate
> 0 — Pruning 1.00 1100% 1 — Memory 1.23 276.7% 2 — Types 1.27 376.7% 3 — Loop labels 1.00 1100% 4 — Math 1.03 296.7% 5 — Verification 1.00 1100%

Importantly, the per-phase fragility profile is kernel-specific . The 

PairLJCut::Compute() kernel used in this ablation has relatively simple data structures and straightforward arithmetic. In contrast, the ReaxFF::Torsion_Angles() kernel described in §4.5 requires processing far more complex data structures and transcendental math functions making the verifier crucial for phases 0 and 4 as well. These results should therefore be interpreted as characterizing the agentic flow on one representative kernel rather than as universal difficulty rankings across phases. 

## 4.5 End-to-End Flow: A Case Study 

To illustrate how A3D operates in practice, we present its end-to-end processing of the ReaxFF::Torsion_Angles() kernel from LAMMPS. This kernel evaluates torsion angle energy contribu-tions in the Reactive Force Field and is representative of the most challenging kernel in our benchmark suite. 

4.5.1 Analysis Phase. The Workload Analyst began by exploring the LAMMPS codebase using semantic search. It identified the reaxff 

workload as exercising the reactive force field potential, mapping the execution flow from the main simulation loop through the ReaxFF force computation routines to the torsion angle evaluation kernel. The Performance Profiler compiled LAMMPS with profiling in-strumentation and executed the reaxff workload. The profiling results identified ReaxFF::Torsion_Angles() as a dominant per-formance bottleneck, owing to its deeply nested loop structure. The Bottleneck Analyst then used CodeQL to perform static anal-ysis, revealing that Torsion_Angles() depends on multiple com-plex data structures spanning several class hierarchies. The Bottle-neck Analyst dynamically generates CodeQL queries tailored to each kernel it analyzes. Figure 5 shows the query it formulated for 

Torsion_Angles() . The query identifies every variable accessed by the kernel, both directly and through functions it calls (one level of call depth), and classifies each access as INPUT or OUTPUT .This produces a complete I/O footprint: variable name, type, and data-flow direction. For Torsion_Angles() , the query identified 25 array parameters spanning 7 struct types across 4 class hierarchy levels, producing the dependency map that guides the Snapshot Engineer (which variables to capture) and the Harness Developer (which data structures the isolated test harness must replicate). Figure 6 shows a subset of these data structures as defined in the                

> import cpp
> from Function f, Variable v, VariableAccess va, string usage ,Function calledFunc
> where
> f.getName() = "Torsion_Angles" and
> f.getFile().getBaseName() = "reaxff_torsion_angles.cpp" and
> ((va.getEnclosingFunction() = f) or
> (exists (FunctionCall fc | fc.getEnclosingFunction() = f and
> fc.getTarget() = calledFunc and
> va.getEnclosingFunction() = calledFunc )) )and
> va.getTarget() = v and if va.isUsedAsLValue()
> then usage = "OUTPUT"
> else usage = "INPUT"
> select va, v.getName() + "," + v.getType().toString() + "," + usage

Figure 5: CodeQL query dynamically generated by the Bot-tleneck Analyst to extract the I/O data-structure footprint of Torsion_Angles() . The query traverses one level of call depth to capture variables accessed by helper functions. 

original LAMMPS source ( reaxff_types.h ). The Bottleneck An-alyst then performs dynamic analysis to determine the runtime sizes and behavior of these data structures with the representative workload. 

4.5.2 Preparation Phase. The Snapshot Engineer instrumented code at the kernel call site to capture the complete input and output state of Torsion_Angles() at the function boundary during workload execution. The captured input snapshot (8.9 MB) includes atom po-sitions, bond and three-body interaction lists (40,320 bonds, 68,659 three-body interactions), workspace arrays, and force field parame-ters; the output snapshot (951 KB) captures all modified state. The Harness Developer created an isolated test harness compris-ing three files ( bottleneck.cpp , bottleneck.h , main.cpp ) that reads the captured snapshots, invokes the extracted kernel, and validates outputs against the golden reference from the output snap-shot. The harness was iteratively refined in collaboration with the Snapshot Engineer until numerical equivalence was achieved. The 

HLS Preparer then performed the most challenging step: refactoring the kernel’s unsupported constructs, such as multi-level pointer indirection, dynamic memory allocation, standard library math functions and floating point numbers, with HLS-compatible alter-natives. This was orchestrated across six specialist phases, each followed by adversarial verification: (0) Datastructure Pruning: Removed 28 unused fields across 7 structs and converted a union to a struct , thereby sim-plifying the kernel’s type system. Nallathambi et al.                                                                                  

> // Primitive types
> using rvec = double [3];
> using ivec = int [3]; // Atom data
> struct reax_atom { rc_tagint orig_id;
> int type; char name[8]; rvec x, v, f; double q;
> int Hindex, num_bonds, num_hbonds; }; // Force field parameters
> struct global_parameters {
> int n_global, vdw_type;
> double *l; };
> struct four_body_parameters {
> double V1, V2, V3;
> double p_tor1, p_cot1; };
> struct four_body_header {
> int cnt; four_body_parameters prm[REAX_MAX_4BODY_PARAM]; };
> struct reax_interaction {
> int num_atom_types; global_parameters gp; single_body_parameters *sbp; two_body_parameters **tbp; three_body_header ***thbp; hbond_parameters ***hbp; four_body_header ****fbp; }; // 1st arg: system
> struct reax_system { reax_interaction reax_param;
> int n, N, numH;
> int local_cap, total_cap, Hcap; reax_atom *my_atoms;
> int my_bonds;
> double safezone, saferzone; LR_lookup_table **LR; }; // 2nd arg: control
> struct control_params {
> int nthreads;
> double bond_cut;
> double nonb_cut, nonb_low;
> double hbond_cut;
> double bg_cut, bo_cut;
> double thb_cut, thb_cutsq;
> int tabulate;
> int lgflag, enobondsflag; }; // 3rd arg: simulation data
> struct energy_data {
> double e_bond, e_ov, e_un;
> double e_lp, e_ang, e_pen;
> double e_coa, e_hb;
> double e_tor, e_con;
> double e_vdW, e_ele, e_pol; };
> struct simulation_data { rc_bigint step; energy_data my_en; }; // 4th arg: workspace storage
> struct storage {
> int allocated;
> double *total_bond_order;
> double *Deltap, *Deltap_boc;
> double *Delta, *Delta_lp;
> double *Delta_lp_temp;
> double *Delta_e, *Delta_boc;
> double *Delta_val;
> double *dDelta_lp;
> double *dDelta_lp_temp;
> double *nlp, *nlp_temp;
> double *Clp, *vlpex; rvec *dDeltap_self;
> int *bond_mark;
> double Tap[8];
> double *CdDelta; rvec *f; rvec *forceReduction;
> double *CdDeltaReduction;
> int *valence_angle_atom_myoffset;
> double *s; reallocate_data realloc; }; // 5th arg: reax_list **
> struct bond_order_data {
> double BO, BO_s, BO_pi, BO_pi2;
> double Cdbo, Cdbopi, Cdbopi2;
> double C1dbo, C2dbo, C3dbo;
> double C1dbopi, C2dbopi;
> double C3dbopi, C4dbopi;
> double C1dbopi2, C2dbopi2;
> double C3dbopi2, C4dbopi2; rvec dBOp, dln_BOp_s; rvec dln_BOp_pi, dln_BOp_pi2;
> double *CdboReduction; };
> struct bond_data {
> int nbr, sym_index;
> int dbond_index; ivec rel_box;
> double d; rvec dvec; bond_order_data bo_data; };
> struct three_body_interaction_data {
> int thb, pthb;
> double theta, cos_theta; rvec dcos_di, dcos_dj, dcos_dk; };
> union list_type { three_body_interaction_data *three_body_list; bond_data *bond_list; far_neighbor_data *far_nbr_list; hbond_data *hbond_list; };
> struct reax_list {
> int allocated, n, num_intrs;
> int *index, *end_index;
> int type; list_type select; };

Figure 6: A subset of the data structures involved in extern void Torsion_Angles(reax_system*, control_params*, simulation_data*, storage*, reax_list**) , as discov-ered by the Bottleneck Analyst. The five function argu-ments expose a deep type hierarchy featuring dynam-ically allocated arrays, multi-level pointer indirection (four_body_header ****fbp ), a union-based polymorphic list container ( list_type ), and nested structs. 

(1) Memory Interface Refactoring: Multi-level pointer indi-rection in bond lists, three-body lists, and atom position ar-rays was converted to C-style array notation with compile-time constants, using the AST-based staticMem tool. The tool applied 105 automated transformations (90 in the ker-nel, 15 in the header). Array dimensions were determined from the captured snapshots and sized 10 × larger to ac-commodate production workloads (e.g., 168 atoms → 2,048 static array, 40,320 bonds → 400,000). A subsequent verifier pass identified a residual LAMMPS::Pair* pointer that was missed; the specialist converted it to a statically-embedded struct, achieving zero remaining pointers across all 15 data structures. (2) Type Conversion: Standard numeric types were replaced with HLS-compatible ac_types using compile guards. The agent queried the Catapult documentation RAG for ap-propriate type mappings (Figure 2). Nine category-specific typedefs were introduced ( Energy_t , Angle_t , BondOrder_t ,

Distance_t , Param_t , Calc_t , AtomDeriv_t , BondDeriv_t ,

Real_t ) to enable independent precision control in the nu-merics exploration phase. All numeric literals were explic-itly typecast using the literalTypecast tool to prevent implicit conversion ambiguities. (3) Loop Labeling: All four nested loop structures were la-beled with unique, descriptive identifiers to enable targeted application of HLS optimization directives in the synthesis phase. (4) Math Function Replacement: Five standard math func-tions ( sin , cos , sqrt , exp , atan2 ) were replaced with HLS-compatible ac_math equivalents, consulting both local doc-umentation and the Catapult RAG pipeline. (5) Construct Verification: A final verification pass ensured no remaining unsupported programming constructs, vali-dated compilation under HLS flags, and confirmed numeri-cal equivalence against the golden snapshots. 

4.5.3 Synthesis Phase. In the synthesis phase, the numerics of data structures and computations were optimized for hardware efficiency while preserving functional correctness, before invoking Catapult HLS for RTL generation. This phase is critical for achieving a performant hardware design, as naive type choices can lead to excessive resource usage or failed synthesis. The Numerics Explorer optimized number formats and bit-widths to maximize hardware efficiency while preserving functional cor-rectness. The kernel’s nine floating-point typedefs, initially set to 

ac_ieee_float64 (IEEE-754 double), were converted to fixed-point representations ( ac_fixed ) for more efficient hardware implemen-tation. A key discovery during this phase was that precision is more im-portant than range . The initial attempt with ac_fixed<64,32,true> 

(32 integer bits, 31 fractional) produced 10.5% error in torsion en-ergy due to insufficient fractional precision for accumulated values. Reducing the integer width to 20 bits while increasing fractional bits to 43 ( ac_fixed<64,20,true> ) passed verification, since 20 integer bits ( ±524,288 range) suffice for all kernel values while 43 fractional bits provide the precision needed for accurate representation. A3D: Agentic AI flow for autonomous Accelerator Design 

The Numerics Explorer then performed per-type bit-width op-timization on each typedef independently, respecting a scalability exception policy: typedefs used in accumulation patterns ( Energy_t ,

AtomDeriv_t , BondDeriv_t ) were preserved at 64 bits to prevent precision loss from compounding across interactions, while op-timization candidates were reduced through binary search with verification after each step: 

• BondOrder_t : 64 → 17 bits (73.4% reduction) — bounded range [0, ∼3] 

• Angle_t : 64 → 21 bits (67.2%) — bounded range [ −𝜋 , 𝜋 ]

• Param_t : 64 → 22 bits (65.6%) — constant force field param-eters 

• Calc_t : 64 → 45 bits (29.7%) — intermediate calculations Two typedefs ( Distance_t , Real_t ) could not be optimized due to type interdependencies: they participate in vector operations (rvec_ScaledAdd ) that interface with AtomDeriv_t (a scalability exception), creating a type-width coupling that the agent correctly identified and documented rather than forcing an incompatible reduction. The Synthesizer invoked Catapult HLS to synthesize the prepared kernel. The baseline synthesis completed successfully in 1 hour 36 minutes, generating RTL netlists in both Verilog and VHDL, along with other artifacts such as synthesis reports, resource utilization summaries, and timing analyses. 

4.5.4 Design Space Exploration. Design space exploration is broken into three phases: (0) knob identification, (1) strategy and configu-ration generation, and (2) execution. The goal is to systematically explore the optimization space of HLS directives (e.g., loop un-rolling, pipelining, memory partitioning) to identify Pareto-optimal configurations that balance area and latency. 

Phase 0 — Knob Identification. The DSE agent conducted 8 fo-cused RAG queries to build comprehensive understanding of Cat-apult HLS optimization techniques, covering design goals, clock period constraints, loop unrolling, loop pipelining, and memory interleaving. It then performed manual code analysis of the ker-nel’s loop hierarchy and classified all loop dependencies, finding that the innermost loop exhibits weak accumulator dependencies (energy accumulations to the same location, force accumulations to different atoms), making II=1 likely achievable. Array access patterns were documented with K-values: the atom position array requires K=4 windowed reads (simultaneously accessing atoms 𝑖 , 𝑗 ,

𝑘 , 𝑙 ), bond lists require K=3 reads, and three-body lists require K=2 reads. 

Phase 1 — Strategy and Configuration Generation. Using the ex-tracted HLS resource paths (25 array parameters and 4 loop paths from the baseline synthesis log) and the knob identification results, the agent generated a YAML design space specification. Figure 7 shows an excerpt of this specification, illustrating its declarative structure. Each dimension defines its options with an HLS directive type, target resource path, and range of values. Memory interleaving factors were computed based on number of accesses per iteration. Multiple interleaving levels were explored for each unroll/pipeline option to map the boundary between feasible and infeasible designs. The agent then invoked the genDSE tool, which parsed this YAML 

> kernel_name: "Torsion_Angles" base_hls_tcl_file: "directives/baseline.tcl" dimensions: - id: "design_goal" type: "DESIGN_GOAL" values: [area, latency] - id: "clock_period" type: "CLOCK_PERIOD" values: [1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 5.0, 7.0, 10.0] - id: "innermost_loop_unroll" type: "UNROLL" target_hls_path: "/.../LOOP_TORSION_ANGLE_L" values: [no, 2, 4] # with interleaving variants - id: "innermost_loop_pipeline" type: "PIPELINE_II" target_hls_path: "/.../LOOP_TORSION_ANGLE_L" values: [none, 1, 2] # with interleaving variants

Figure 7: Excerpt of the YAML design space specification generated by the DSE agent for Torsion_Angles() . Each di-mension declares its HLS directive type, target resource path, and the set of values to explore. The genDSE tool parses this specification and performs combinatorial expansion to emit one Tcl directive file per design point. 

specification, performed combinatorial expansion across all pos-sible combinations, and emitted 649 synthesis-ready Tcl directive files along with a CSV summary manifest. 

Phase 2 — Parallel Execution. The agent invoked the runDSE 

execution tool, which scheduled the 649 configurations for par-allel synthesis across 128 concurrent jobs distributed over local and remote compute nodes. The tool manages Catapult invocation with the appropriate directive file for each design point, handles remote job scheduling via SSH, and collects per-configuration syn-thesis logs. The total runtime for all 649 syntheses was 30 hours 27 minutes. Of the 649 configurations, 109 synthesized successfully 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 

2

3

4

5

·10 6

> Synthesis Time
> 1.5 h 13 h 25 h

Latency (ms) 

> Area

Figure 8: Design space exploration results for 

Torsion_Angles() . Each point represents a successfully synthesized configuration; marker size encodes synthesis time (1.5–25 h). Green markers indicate the 7 Pareto-optimal designs spanning a 25 × latency– 2.1× area tradeoff. Nallathambi et al. 

(16.8% success rate). The 540 failures are expected and informa-tive: they represent under-interleaved configurations that cannot meet scheduling constraints, validating the memory pressure model from Phase 0. Configurations with position array interleaving below K=4 systematically fail, confirming the windowed access analysis. Successful configurations span the full optimization space, with area-optimized designs (slow clock, lower unroll) succeeding with minimal interleaving and latency-optimized designs (fast clock, higher unroll/pipeline) requiring full interleaving. Individual syn-thesis times ranged from ∼1.5 hours for simple configurations to up to 25 hours for complex designs. Figure 8 shows the complete design space for Torsion_Angles ,plotting latency against area for all 109 successfully synthesized configurations. The Pareto front identifies 7 non-dominated designs spanning a 25 × latency range (2.5–61.6 ms) and a 2.1× area range. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We present A3D, the first agentic AI system for end-to-end au-tomation of hardware design from application codebases to diverse accelerator architectures. Starting from a C/C++ or CUDA code-base and a representative workload, A3D autonomously profiles the application, identifies performance bottlenecks, extracts and iso-lates target kernels, refactors them for HLS compatibility, performs high-level synthesis, and explores the design space, all with zero human intervention. We demonstrated A3D on two production-scale scientific computing applications, processing kernels that span a wide range of HLS challenges. An ablation study validated A3D’s three-layer architecture: task decomposition, deterministic tool augmentation, and adversarial specialist–verifier loops each contribute measurably to reliability, and only their combination achieves the high success rates required for unmanned deployment. These findings suggest that reliable agentic automation of complex engineering tasks requires the synergy of all three principles. 

## References 

[1] Yushi Bai, Xin Lv, Jiajie Zhang, Hongchang Lyu, Jiankai Tang, Zhidian Huang, Zhengxiao Du, Xiao Liu, Aohan Zeng, Lei Hou, et al . 2024. Longbench: A bilingual, multitask benchmark for long context understanding. In Proceedings of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers) . 3119–3137. [2] Fengxiang Bie, Yibo Yang, Zhongzhu Zhou, Adam Ghanem, Minjia Zhang, Zhewei Yao, Xiaoxia Wu, Connor Holmes, Pareesa Golnari, David A Clifton, et al . 2024. Renaissance: A survey into ai text-to-image generation in the era of large model. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 47, 3 (2024), 2212–2231. [3] Yu-Hsin Chen, Tushar Krishna, Joel S Emer, and Vivienne Sze. 2016. Eyeriss: An energy-efficient reconfigurable accelerator for deep convolutional neural networks. IEEE journal of solid-state circuits 52, 1 (2016), 127–138. [4] Andrew A Chien, Allan Snavely, and Mark Gahagan. 2011. 10x10: A general-purpose architectural approach to heterogeneity and energy efficiency. Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011), 1987–1996. [5] Luca Collini, Siddharth Garg, and Ramesh Karri. 2025. C2hlsc: Leveraging large language models to bridge the software-to-hardware design gap. ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems 30, 6 (2025), 1–24. [6] Yu Gao, Haoyuan Guo, Tuyen Hoang, Weilin Huang, Lu Jiang, Fangyuan Kong, Huixia Li, Jiashi Li, Liang Li, Xiaojie Li, et al . 2025. Seedance 1.0: Exploring the boundaries of video generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09113 (2025). [7] Yuko Hara, Hiroyuki Tomiyama, Shinya Honda, Hiroaki Takada, and Katsuya Ishii. 2008. Chstone: A benchmark program suite for practical c-based high-level synthesis. In 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) .IEEE, 1192–1195. [8] John L Hennessy and David A Patterson. 2019. A new golden age for computer architecture. Commun. ACM 62, 2 (2019), 48–60. [9] Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al . 2025. A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy, chal-lenges, and open questions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 2 (2025), 1–55. [10] Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jiasi Shen, Sungju Kim, and Sunghun Kim. 2026. A survey on large language models for code generation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 35, 2 (2026), 1–72. [11] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,Vol. 2024. 54107–54157. [12] Norman P Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David Patterson, Gaurav Agrawal, Raminder Bajwa, Sarah Bates, Suresh Bhatia, Nan Boden, Al Borchers, et al . 2017. In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit. In Proceedings of the 44th annual international symposium on computer architecture . 1–12. [13] Paul RC Kent, Abdulgani Annaberdiyev, Anouar Benali, M Chandler Bennett, Edgar Josué Landinez Borda, Peter Doak, Hongxia Hao, Kenneth D Jordan, Jaron T Krogel, Ilkka Kylänpää, et al . 2020. QMCPACK: Advances in the develop-ment, efficiency, and application of auxiliary field and real-space variational and diffusion quantum Monte Carlo. The Journal of chemical physics 152, 17 (2020). [14] M Khan, Nowfel Mashnoor, Mohammad Akyash, Kimia Azar, and Hadi Kamali. 2025. SAGE-HLS: Syntax-Aware AST-Guided LLM for High-Level Synthesis Code Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03558 (2025). [15] Sakari Lahti, Panu Sjövall, Jarno Vanne, and Timo D Hämäläinen. 2018. Are we there yet? A study on the state of high-level synthesis. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 38, 5 (2018), 898–911. [16] Runkai Li, Jia Xiong, Xiuyuan He, Jiaqi Lv, Jieru Zhao, and Xi Wang. 2025. ChatHLS: Towards Systematic Design Automation and Optimization for High-Level Synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.00642 (2025). [17] Grant Martin and Gary Smith. 2009. High-level synthesis: Past, present, and future. IEEE Design & Test of Computers 26, 4 (2009), 18–25. [18] Alexander Novikov, Ngân V ˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej Balog. 2025. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv:2506.13131 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131 [19] Ali Emre Oztas and Mahdi Jelodari. 2024. Agentic-HLS: An agentic reasoning based high-level synthesis system using large language models (AI for EDA workshop 2024). arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01604 (2024). [20] Neha Prakriya, Zijian Ding, Yizhou Sun, and Jason Cong. 2025. LIFT: Llm-based pragma insertion for HLS via GNN supervised fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21187 (2025). [21] Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3.5: Towards Native Multimodal Agents. https://qwen. ai/blog?id=qwen3.5 [22] Brandon Reagen, Robert Adolf, Yakun Sophia Shao, Gu-Yeon Wei, and David Brooks. 2014. MachSuite: Benchmarks for accelerator design and customized architectures. In 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC) . IEEE, 110–119. [23] RooCodeInc. [n. d.]. Roo-Code. https://github.com/RooCodeInc/Roo-Code GitHub repository. [24] Nikola Samardzic, Axel Feldmann, Aleksandar Krastev, Srinivas Devadas, Ronald Dreslinski, Christopher Peikert, and Daniel Sanchez. 2021. F1: A fast and pro-grammable accelerator for fully homomorphic encryption. In MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture . 238–252. [25] Benjamin Carrion Schafer and Zi Wang. 2019. High-level synthesis design space exploration: Past, present, and future. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 39, 10 (2019), 2628–2639. [26] Atefeh Sohrabizadeh, Cody Hao Yu, Min Gao, and Jason Cong. 2022. AutoDSE: Enabling software programmers to design efficient FPGA accelerators. ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems (TODAES) 27, 4 (2022), 1–27. [27] Kling Team, Jialu Chen, Yuanzheng Ci, Xiangyu Du, Zipeng Feng, Kun Gai, Sainan Guo, Feng Han, Jingbin He, Kang He, et al . 2025. Kling-Omni Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16776 (2025). [28] A. P. Thompson, H. M. Aktulga, R. Berger, D. S. Bolintineanu, W. M. Brown, P. S. Crozier, P. J. in ’t Veld, A. Kohlmeyer, S. G. Moore, T. D. Nguyen, R. Shan, M. J. Stevens, J. Tranchida, C. Trott, and S. J. Plimpton. 2022. LAMMPS - a flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum scales. Comp. Phys. Comm. 271 (2022), 108171. doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2021. 108171 [29] Hanyu Wang, Xinrui Wu, Zijian Ding, Su Zheng, Chengyue Wang, Tony Nowatzki, Yizhou Sun, and Jason Cong. 2025. LLM-DSE: Searching Accelerator Parameters with LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12188 (2025). [30] Jing Wang, Shang Liu, Yao Lu, and Zhiyao Xie. 2025. HLSDebugger: Identification and Correction of Logic Bugs in HLS Code with LLM Solutions. In 2025 IEEE/ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design (ICCAD) . IEEE, 1–9. A3D: Agentic AI flow for autonomous Accelerator Design 

[31] Chenwei Xiong, Cheng Liu, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. 2024. Hlspilot: Llm-based high-level synthesis. In Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design . 1–9. [32] Kangwei Xu, Grace Li Zhang, Xunzhao Yin, Cheng Zhuo, Ulf Schlichtmann, and Bing Li. 2024. Automated c/c++ program repair for high-level synthesis via large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Machine Learning for CAD . 1–9. [33] Kangwei Xu, Grace Li Zhang, Xunzhao Yin, Cheng Zhuo, Ulf Schlichtmann, and Bing Li. 2025. HLSRewriter: Efficient Refactoring and Optimization of C/C++ Code with LLMs for High-Level Synthesis. ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems (2025). [34] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 (2022). [35] Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, et al . 2025. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 (2025). [36] Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al . 2023. A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 1, 2 (2023), 1–124.