Title: TENNOR: Trustworthy Execution for Neural Networks through Obliviousness and Retrievals

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.07160v1

Published Time: Mon, 11 May 2026 00:34:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# TENNOR: Trustworthy Execution for Neural Networks through Obliviousness and Retrievals 

# Zifan Qu 

George Mason University Fairfax, VA, USA zqu4@gmu.edu 

# Vasileios P. Kemerlis 

Brown University Providence, RI, USA vpk@cs.brown.edu 

# Giuseppe Ateniese 

George Mason University Fairfax, VA, USA ateniese@gmu.edu 

# Evgenios M. Kornaropoulos 

George Mason University Fairfax, VA, USA evgenios@gmu.edu 

## Abstract 

Training wide neural networks on sensitive data in untrusted cloud environments requires simultaneously achieving computational efficiency and rigorous privacy guarantees. Sparsification tech-niques, essential for scalable training of wide layers, expose input-dependent memory-access patterns (i.e., leakage) that are visible and can be exploited by a host OS/hypervisor, even when computa-tion is protected by a Trusted Execution Environment. We present TENNOR , a system that resolves this tension by co-designing the neural network training pipeline with doubly oblivi-ous primitives, eliminating access-pattern leakage while also utiliz-ing adaptive sparsification. TENNOR recasts sparse neuron activation as a locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) retrieval problem, reducing secure sparsification to doubly oblivious accesses over an LSH data structure. To eliminate the prohibitive storage cost of “multi-table” LSH, we introduce Multi-Probe Winner-Take-All (MP-WTA): the first multi-probe scheme for rank-based LSH, achieving a 50 × re-duction in (hash table) memory while preserving model accuracy. We evaluate TENNOR on extreme multi-label classification bench-marks with output layers of up to 325 K neurons inside an Intel TDX Trusted Domain, achieving speedups of 13 ×–470 × over a Path ORAM baseline and reducing a 208-hour run to about 26 minutes. 

## Keywords 

Neural Networks, Obliviousness, Trusted Execution Environments 

## 1 Introduction 

The success of neural networks (NN) has led the community to develop a range of architectures, each tailored to different tasks and presenting their own computational challenges. Whether the pipeline is built around convolutional networks for vision, trans-formers for language, or recommendation models for personal-ization [ 28 , 44 , 78 , 103 ], the choice of architecture fundamentally shapes how computation must be organized, scheduled, and op-timized. Among these, a particularly demanding class consists of networks containing extremely wide layers 1: i.e., layers whose di-mensionality reaches into the hundreds of thousands, or even mil-lions, of neurons. Such layers arise naturally in the output lay-ers of extreme multi-label classification and recommendation sys-tems [6, 28, 69, 91, 113]. 

> 1The width of a network is defined to be the maximal number of nodes in a layer.

Efficient and Adaptive Access via Sparsification. Wide lay-ers are computationally demanding even in standard, non-privacy-preserving settings. When a single layer contains tens of thousands of neurons, the cost of organizing, storing, and accessing its param-eters becomes a bottleneck. This state of affairs has motivated a sub-stantial body of work on sparsification [45 ]. That is, rather than acti-vating all neurons in the wide layer for every input, only a small sub-set participates, dramatically reducing computation per access. Spar-sification comes in two flavors: non-adaptive [35 , 41 , 42 ], in which the network is pruned to permanently remove neurons that do not contribute to model performance; and adaptive [10 , 63 , 92 , 97 ], in which sparsity is applied dynamically, at access time, depending on the input. In this work, we focus on the latter. The resulting techniques for making wide-layer networks scalable have become a standard in modern systems [21, 34, 70, 92]. While inference accesses the wide layer once, training requires repeated accesses over the wide layer. This repetition makes wide-layer training the dominant computational bottleneck, far exceed-ing the cost of inference in any realistic deployment scenario [ 21 ,22 , 91 , 97 ]. Crucially, adaptive sparsification transforms wide-layer computation from dense matrix operations into sparse, irregular memory accesses, which is a workload that aligns poorly with GPU architectures that are optimized for regular data parallelism. CPUs, with their deep cache hierarchies and flexible control flow, are a natural fit for such access patterns, and prior work has shown that sparse training on CPUs can match or outperform GPUs on wide-layer networks [22, 30, 70] .

Trustworthy NN Training. In this work, we introduce a trust-worthiness dimension to this setting by requiring that model pa-rameters remain confidential via a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE), where an untrusted OS/hypervisor can observe memory access patterns even when data is encrypted. Unfortunately, spar-sification, which is essential for scalability, becomes a liability in adversarial settings [ 51 , 82 ]. The pattern of which a subset of neu-rons is adaptively activated for a given input is precisely the kind of access pattern that must not be revealed, since it leaks information about the input values. A growing body of attacks has demonstrated that access patterns over encrypted data can be exploited to recover the underlying plaintext [ 12 , 17 , 39 , 52 , 56 –58 , 115 ]. Thus, naively applying sparsification to a wide layer exposes an attack vector, as 

> arXiv:2605.07160v1 [cs.CR] 8 May 2026

memory accesses are revealed. This tension between (1) the effi-ciency gains from sparsification and (2) the access-pattern leakage motivates the privacy-preserving system we propose in this work. 

TENNOR (which stands for T rustworthy Execution for Neural N etworks through Obliviousness and Retrieval) is a system that is designed around CPUs and synthesizes doubly-oblivious primi-tives to enable private training on wide neural networks without revealing sparsification access patterns to the host OS/hypervisor. Central to our efficiency is the observation that sparsification can be cast as a retrieval task over a locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) data structure [ 21 , 22 , 48 , 95 , 97 ]. This framing allows us to adaptively identify active neurons without scanning the full layer, and to do so obliviously. We show that by co-designing the obliviousness mecha-nism with a sparse-activation structure, we achieve secure training on wide-layer networks at orders-of-magnitude lower cost than existing oblivious approaches, while providing rigorous guarantees against access-pattern leakage. We make the following contributions: 

(1) Doubly-oblivious Wide-layer Training Pipeline. We design and implement TENNOR , an end-to-end doubly-oblivious training pipeline for wide neural networks within TEEs that eliminates access-pattern leakage. TENNOR carefully composes oblivious hash tables, oblivious sorting, and branch-free primitives into a prov-ably secure adaptive sparsification pipeline, with security formally established via a simulation-based proof under a standard TEE adversarial model. 

(2) Multi-Probe Winner-Take-All LSH. At the heart of our de-sign is a newly introduced multi-probe scheme for rank-based LSH (dubbed MP-WTA), which defines a principled notion of neighbor-ing buckets under WTA’s ordinal hashing framework. MP-WTA achieves retrieval quality equivalent to that of 50 independent hash tables, but it uses only a single table, reducing LSH storage by 50 ×

with negligible accuracy loss. 

(3) Orders-of-magnitude Performance over Baseline. On ex-treme multi-label classification benchmarks with up to 325 K output neurons, TENNOR achieves 13 ×–470 × speedup over a Path ORAM baseline running inside Intel TDX. For this performance, we intro-duce three targeted optimizations (i.e., deferred dummy payload instantiation, parallel oblivious LSH scanning, and OHT layout reuse) that collectively eliminate the dominant bottlenecks while preserving double obliviousness. 

## 2 Background 2.1 Trusted Execution Environments 

Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) (e.g., Intel SGX [ 26 ], ARM TrustZone [ 84 ], AMD SEV [ 1], Keystone [ 60 ]) are hardware-enforced, isolated runtime environments that protect certain code and data from the rest of the system, including privileged software like the OS or a hypervisor. In VM-based TEEs, such as Intel TDX [ 24 ], the protected workload (including a guest OS, if present) runs inside a Trust Domain (TD), while the host and hypervisor remain out-side the trust boundary. Beyond isolation, TEEs provide attestation ,enabling remote parties to verify that a workload is genuinely exe-cuting within a secure enclave. Together, these guarantees underpin cloud confidential computing , such as secure machine learning ser-vices, allowing users to outsource sensitive data and computations without exposing their contents to an infrastructure provider. Despite these protections, TEEs do not defend against most classes of side-channel attacks . Prior work has demonstrated attacks compromising confidentiality by exploiting leakage from secret-dependent memory accesses or control-flow behavior [ 14 , 59 , 61 , 73 ,74 , 94 , 102 , 111 ]. Complementing architectural [ 13 , 27 ] and software defenses [ 23 , 93 ], data-oblivious programming offers an alternative mitigation strategy: programs are written such that their memory access patterns are independent of any secret inputs (§3). 

## 2.2 Oblivious Computation 

At a high level, a computation is oblivious if its memory access pattern depends only on public information (e.g., input length and fixed parameters) and not on sensitive values. More formally, a computation is oblivious iff any two input sequences of the same length induce memory access patterns that are indistinguishable to a computationally-bounded adversary. Obliviousness further requires that branches, loop bounds, and memory indices in the executed code do not depend on secret data. 

Oblivious RAM. Oblivious RAM (ORAM), introduced by Goldre-ich and Ostrovsky [ 37 ], is a general-purpose technique for achieving obliviousness. At a high level, ORAM conceals which logical block is accessed by performing additional reads and writes and period-ically shuffling data, so that the observed access pattern reveals only the number of operations, not their targets. ORAM has been substantially improved over the past few decades [ 4, 5 , 83 , 98 , 107 ], yet it remains a generic construction. Application-specific oblivious designs have been shown to achieve significantly better performance, as we also demonstrate in this work. 

Application-tailored Obliviousness. Beyond generic ORAM, the research community has developed oblivious data structures 

(ODS) [ 108 ] and oblivious algorithms tailored to specific tasks. Prior work has produced oblivious counterparts for a range of algorithms and data structures, including transactional and map-like systems [ 29 , 99 ], search indexes and database query process-ing [ 33 , 71 ], hashing [ 19 ], and sorting [ 3, 8, 80 , 89 ]. At the primitive level, basic operations such as comparison , swap , and copy must also be oblivious. Several works [ 32 , 80 , 88 , 89 , 99 ] employ branch-free primitives, such as CMOV (x86) instructions and bitwise masking, to ensure that access patterns are independent of the input. 

Double Obliviousness. In TEEs, access-pattern leakage can arise from three sources: (1) memory accesses inside the TEE, (2) ac-cesses to encrypted memory outside the TEE, and (3) contention on shared microarchitectural resources. Early work largely focused on concealing access patterns at the boundary between the TEE and external memory—i.e., point (2). This scope was broadened by Oblix [ 71 ], which introduced the notion of double obliviousness ,requiring that access patterns within the TEE are also protected— i.e., point (1). Subsequent works [ 18 , 32 , 99 ] adopt this definition, ensuring that operations inside the TEE are themselves oblivious. 

## 2.3 CPU-friendly Neural Networks 

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are commonly trained on GPUs and specialized accelerators, as dense layers map naturally to large matrix multiplications. In this work, we target CPU-based TEEs, making CPU-efficient DNN designs particularly relevant; more broadly, CPUs are the platform of choice when GPUs are unavailable (e.g., at the edge) or when power and cost constraints dominate [72]. Running DNN inference on general-purpose CPUs is challenging for two reasons. First, arithmetic throughput is limited: CPUs have fewer cores and narrower SIMD units, making naive dense-layer execution orders of magnitude slower. Second, performance is often memory-bound: CPUs rely heavily on caching to compensate for slower RAM access, so models whose working sets exceed the cache, or whose access patterns are irregular, suffer significant slowdowns. 

Sub-Linear Deep Learning Engine. Chen et al. [ 22 ] introduced the Sub-Linear Deep Learning Engine (SLIDE): a CPU-oriented frame-work for training and inference that replaces dense computation with adaptive sparsity. Given an input, SLIDE uses locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) to identify a small, input-dependent active subset of neurons—in wide layers—and restricts forward and backward passes to this subset. This reduces dense matrix multiplication to a small number of hash-table lookups and sparse dot products, better exploiting CPU strengths. However, because the active set is only an approximation of the true top-activated neurons, accuracy can degrade if the active set is too small. More critically for our setting, 

the accessed hash buckets and updated neurons depend directly on the input, making naive SLIDE-style execution highly access-pattern-sensitive and therefore insecure inside a TEE .

## 2.4 Locality-sensitive Hashing 

Locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) is a family of randomized hash functions with the property that similar items are more likely to 

collide (i.e., land in the same bucket) than dissimilar ones [ 48 ]. Unlike traditional hashing, collisions in LSH are intentional: they provide a fast mechanism for retrieving a short list of candidates without scanning the full dataset. Several LSH families have been proposed for different similarity measures, including MinHash for Jaccard similarity [ 15 ], SimHash for cosine similarity [ 20 ], and Winner-Take-All hashing for rank-based comparisons [ 112 ]. LSH has found application across a wide range of domains, including approximate nearest-neighbor (ANN) search [ 2 ], recommendation systems [ 95 ], data deduplication [ 9 ], and accelerating machine learning [50, 54, 96]. SLIDE uses LSH for fast network sparsification during training (§2.3). More formally, let 𝑑 be the distance measure on the domain 𝑆 .

Definition 2.1 (LSH family). A function family 𝐻 is called 

(𝑟, 𝑐 · 𝑟, 𝑝 1, 𝑝 2)-sensitive for 𝑑 , if for any 𝑝, 𝑞 ∈ 𝑆 :

• If 𝑑 (𝑝, 𝑞 ) ≤ 𝑟 , then Pr ℎ←𝐻 [ℎ(𝑝 ) = ℎ(𝑞 )] ≥ 𝑝 1,

• If 𝑑 (𝑝, 𝑞 ) > 𝑐 · 𝑟 , then Pr ℎ←𝐻 [ℎ(𝑝 ) = ℎ(𝑞 )] ≤ 𝑝 2

For ANN search, we require 𝑐 > 1 and 𝑝 1 > 𝑝 2: points within dis-tance 𝑟 collide with probability at least 𝑝 1, while points farther than 

𝑐𝑟 collide with probability at most 𝑝 2. In practice, this gap is ampli-fied by concatenating multiple hash functions and/or maintaining multiple hash tables, then probing the corresponding buckets to retrieve candidates. We next describe Winner-Take-All hashing, the rank-based LSH family used by both SLIDE and TENNOR .

## 2.5 Winner-Take-All Hashing 

Winner-Take-All (WTA) [ 112 ] is an LSH family for rank-based similarity that captures ordinal relationships between features rather than metric distances. Unlike traditional LSH, WTA is invariant to positive rescaling of features, making it particularly suitable for high-dimensional representations common in deep learning. 

LSH for Rank Correlation. Most LSH families target metric distances, such as Euclidean or angular distance. WTA instead targets rank correlation , which depends only on the relative ordering of feature values rather than their absolute magnitudes. Under this notion, two vectors are similar when their features share the same ranking, even if the actual values differ. Rank correlation is quantified by counting pairwise order agreements between two rankings as: 

𝑃𝑂 (𝑋, 𝑌 ) =

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

∑︁ 𝑗 <𝑖 

𝑇  (𝑥 𝑖 − 𝑥 𝑗 )( 𝑦 𝑖 − 𝑦 𝑗 ) , (1) 

𝑥 𝑖 and 𝑦 𝑖 are the values of the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ feature of 𝑋, 𝑌 ∈ R𝑛 and 𝑇 (𝑧 ) is a threshold function that takes value 1, if 𝑧 > 0, or value 0, if 𝑧 ≤ 0.Informally, this counts the number of feature pairs on which 𝑋 and 

𝑌 agree in ordering (i.e., either both 𝑥 𝑖 > 𝑥 𝑗 and 𝑦 𝑖 > 𝑦 𝑗 , or vice versa). A high 𝑃𝑂 value indicates that the two vectors induce very similar rankings over their 𝑛 features. Rank correlation is particularly well-suited for domains with noisy, heterogeneously scaled, or sparse feature representations .

WTA Hashing. While rank correlation is theoretically well-founded, exact computation requires O( 𝑛 2) comparisons per vector and does not scale. WTA approximates rank similarity by sampling a random subset of features and recording only the winner—i.e., the index of the maximum value—within that subset. Concretely, each hash function ℎ𝑖 (·) is parameterized by a fixed random permuta-tion and a window size 𝑀 ; given a vector 𝑋 , it outputs the index of the maximum among the 𝑀 sampled features. Applying 𝐾 such functions yields a signature h(𝑋 ) = (ℎ1 (𝑋 ), . . . , ℎ 𝐾 (𝑋 )) . Two vec-tors with similar rankings tend to agree on the winner across many sampled windows, so the Hamming distance between their signatures serves as a proxy for rank-based similarity. 

## 3 Threat Model 

We assume a TEE-based threat model, aligned with prior work [ 18 ,71 , 99 ], which combines protected execution with double obliviousness .In our prototype, the TEE is instantiated as an Intel TDX TD/VM. We assume a powerful adversary A that: (1) controls the host software stack (e.g., the host OS and/or hypervisor); and (2) can observe memory access patterns generated by the TD during execution. In particular, A can observe memory accesses at both page and cache-line granularity. However, A cannot access processor-internal secrets within the TEE, including the hardware root key (used for memory encryption, attestation, key derivation, etc.), nor can it inspect CPU register contents during TEE execution. 

Our guarantee applies at the algorithmic access pattern level . Ad-ditionally, we consider power-analysis [ 55 , 65 ], rollback [ 67 , 114 ], timing-based [ 109 , 110 ], and denial-of-service [ 24 ] attacks out of scope. We use Snoopy’s [ 32 ] code primitives (i.e., copy, sort), but we do not claim whole-program, binary-level obliviousness after com-piler optimizations. Our goal is to eliminate access-pattern leakage under the aforementioned adversarial observation capabilities. Our system runs inside a Trusted Domain (TD) provided by Intel TDX on an untrusted cloud server. The user’s client establishes a secure channel to the remote TD/TEE using remote attestation, derives a session key, and transmits sensitive data over this channel. The code executes within the TD, and all sensitive data are pro-cessed within the TD. Unlike an SGX-style enclave setting, where one often distinguishes enclave memory from memory outside the enclave, the relevant boundary here is the TD/VM vs. entities exter-nal to the TD/VM (i.e., OS, VMM). Although our prototype focuses on Intel TDX, the threat model considered relies only on standard TEE guarantees (e.g., protected execution, memory encryption) and therefore the same high-level objectives are also relevant to other TEEs, such as Intel SGX and AMD SEV—although the concrete trust boundary and system instantiation may differ. 

## 4 Overview 4.1 Key Insights 

Secure Neural Network training on an untrusted cloud requires 

double obliviousness at the algorithmic access-pattern level, i.e., data-dependent access patterns, across the memory hierarchy, must be avoided. The key challenge is to introduce new techniques and carefully compose existing ones, tailored to the wide NN training pipeline so as to produce an efficient doubly-oblivious system. 

1 NN-Adaptive Sparsification via Data Structure Retrieval. 

Textbook NN training processes all neurons for each input. More advanced approaches apply static pruning to sparsify the network, reducing both computation and storage. Instead, TENNOR dynam-ically selects a small subset of dominant neurons, at runtime, via adaptive sparsification . Specifically, TENNOR transforms dense ma-trix multiplication into an LSH table-retrieval task, a method origi-nally introduced by Chen et al. [ 22 ]. By casting sparsification as a retrieval problem, TENNOR avoids computing the subset of activated neurons via MPC or HE. Instead, TENNOR performs lookups in an LSH table that groups neurons during initialization to facilitate spar-sification. Consequently, secure sparsification reduces to performing doubly-oblivious accesses to the LSH table(s) .

2 Reduced LSH Tables via Multi-Probe WTA. Given that LSH is a data structure with probabilistic guarantees, a standard ap-proach to amplify the probability of success is to construct multiple LSH tables and fetch a bucket from each. Instead, TENNOR introduces a novel LSH scheme for WTA that retrieves multiple buckets from a single table , rather than retrieving a single bucket from multiple tables (as SLIDE [ 22 ] does). This Multi-Probe WTA scheme, which is of independent interest, preserves NN training accuracy (see §7.3) while reducing space usage by 50 ×.

3 Tailored Doubly-Oblivious Design. With these design choices, wide NN training within TENNOR reduces adaptive spar-sification to mapping training data points to neurons. The key efficiency question is which collection of “objects” (e.g., training data points or neurons) should serve as the target of oblivious fetch-ing. Rather than fixing a training point and obliviously scanning across all neurons, TENNOR reverses this approach completely: for each fixed neuron, it obliviously fetches the training points that require it .Naively applying this idea to the entire training set would be costly, due to the scalability limitations of oblivious computation over such a large collection (of training data). To address this, TENNOR parti-tions the training data into batches and performs oblivious fetching per batch. Overall, the linear scan of the LSH table that stores neurons is doubly-oblivious, while the request entries within each batch are organized in a doubly-oblivious hash table [ 19 ], providing the overall obliviousness guarantees. Hence, under cache-line-level leakage, TENNOR provides double obliviousness. 

## 4.2 Approach 

Figure 1 shows the high-level workflow and components of TENNOR .The system operates entirely within an Intel TDX Trusted Domain (TD) and is designed to provide double obliviousness. 

NN Preprocessing. During initialization, TENNOR samples hash functions for the wide layer of the NN and stores that layer in the LSH key-value store shown on the right-hand side of Figure 1. Importantly, each LSH key-value pair stores the full information associated with a neuron (e.g., weights, gradients, bias), rather than a pointer that must be dereferenced to retrieve neuron state from another data structure. The training data is then partitioned into batches. 1 The workflow begins when a batch of training inputs is transmitted to TENNOR , and execution proceeds through three doubly-oblivious components (outlined below). 

Neuron Requester. Each input in the batch “requests” a subset of active neurons for training. Multiple inputs may require the same neuron, which can lead to redundant fetches. 2 To handle this efficiently, we organize neuron requests from all inputs into a 

Request-Array that stores the triplet: ( 𝑖 ) the probed LSHbucketID ,(𝑖𝑖 ) the input’s position in the batch, and ( 𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) a placeholder buffer for the neuron data (to be populated later). 3 A single training data point probes multiple locations in the LSH table, generating multiple entries in the Request-Array .

Neuron Fetcher. The Request-Array does not group requests by neuron, so determining which training data points in a batch trigger a particular neuron requires additional bookkeeping. 4 To address this, TENNOR transforms the Request-Array into an Obliv-ious Hash Table (OHT) [ 19 ], which acts as an oblivious key-value store where the key is an LSHbucketID and the value consists of the corresponding Request-Array triplet(s). At this stage, the triplets do not yet store any neurons. 5 Next, TENNOR performs a linear scan over the LSH table; at each iteration, the current LSHbucketID 

is used as a key to the OHT to locate the associated triplet(s) and populate them with the neurons stored in the corresponding bucket. 6 After the scan completes, the OHT is transformed back into a populated Request-Array containing the requested neurons. If multiple triplets request the same LSHbucketID , TENNOR creates a separate copy of the padded bucket contents for each triplet. 

Neuron Updater. Once the Request-Array has been populated, 

TENNOR performs feedforward and backpropagation only on the neurons contained in it. 7 Because the same neuron may appear in multiple triplets, TENNOR obliviously aggregates the gradient up-dates from all copies to compute a single consolidated update as part of the backpropagation. 8 Finally, TENNOR obliviously writes the updated neurons back to the LSH table by invoking Neuron Fetcher again, this time with the updated neurons. Unlike the first Figure 1: Design of TENNOR . The components Neuron Requester , Neuron Fetcher , and Neuron Updater follow a doubly-oblivious design when accessing or updating the wide NN stored in Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) table(s), shown on the right-hand side. The LSH tables use our newly introduced Multi-Probe Winner-Take-All (MP-WTA) hashing scheme (see §5.1). 

invocation of Neuron Fetcher (which takes place during feedfor-ward) that transfers neurons from the LSH table to the OHT, this step (now in backpropagation) writes the updated neurons from the OHT back to the LSH table. Although our prototype targets Intel TDX, its modular design allows it to be adapted to other TEE implementations, such as Intel SGX and AMD SEV, with minimal (if any) changes. 

## 5 Design and Implementation of TENNOR 5.1 LSH Storage Reduction 

Recall that amplifying the probability of success in LSH typically requires constructing multiple hash tables and querying the cor-responding bucket in each table. An alternative approach from the information retrieval community, called Multi-Probe LSH (MP-LSH) [ 66 ], addresses this requirement by probing multiple buckets within a single hash table. The key intuition is that if a stored item is “close” to the query item 𝑞 , but does not fall into the same bucket, it is likely to reside in a “nearby” bucket—i.e., a bucket whose hash value differs only slightly from that of 𝑞 . Accordingly, MP-LSH probes a sequence Seq of neighboring buckets around the original hash 

h(𝑞 ) within the same table : Seq (𝑞 ) = (h(𝑞 ), h1 (𝑞 ), h2 (𝑞 ), . . . , h𝑧 (𝑞 )) .

Each bucket h𝑖 (𝑞 ) differs from the original h(𝑞 ) by a perturbation 

𝛿 𝑖 . This strategy achieves search quality comparable to standard LSH while requiring significantly fewer hash tables. 

Multi-Probe WTA. To the best of our knowledge, no multi-probe scheme has been proposed for WTA in the literature. The main challenge lies in defining what constitutes a “neighboring” bucket within WTA’s rank-based hashing framework. In the origi-nal MP-LSH [ 66 ] work, perturbations are typically ±1. That is, for a given dimension of h(𝑞 ), the two neighboring probe buckets are obtained by incrementing or decrementing that dimension’s inte-ger value by one. In contrast, WTA hashing operates differently; it samples a subset of elements from the query vector and returns the index of the maximum element within that subset. Consequently, unlike LSH for Euclidean distance, there is no obvious notion of a “neighbor” LSH bucket in this ranking-based setting. 

Our Approach. Suppose the WTA signature of a query (or vec-tor) 𝑞 ∈ R𝑚 is h(𝑞 ) =  ℎ1 (𝑞 ), . . . , ℎ 𝐾 (𝑞 ), where each hash ℎ𝑖 (𝑞 )

returns the index of the maximum feature value among the 𝑀 

sampled features used in the 𝑖 th WTA function. If multiple sam-pled features have the same value, ties are broken deterministically according to the fixed sampled order of that hash function. Our ap-proach defines a neighboring LSH bucket by considering the index of the second-largest feature value within the corresponding sam-pled subset; this index is denoted by ℎ2 

> 𝑖

(·) . We generate a perturbed hash by selecting a signature dimension 𝑖 and replacing ℎ𝑖 (𝑞 ) with 

ℎ2 

> 𝑖

(𝑞 ). Consider two vectors with nearly identical feature values except for a single feature that appears as a large outlier in one of the vectors; if this outlier is sampled during the computation of ℎ𝑖 ,its index will dominate that position of the signature. By falling back to the second-largest value, we obtain a more robust representation that avoids penalizing otherwise similar vectors that differ only in the identity of the maximum feature .

Further Relaxation. The above approach perturbs a single position of h(𝑞 ) using one specific alternative. We extend this idea along two axes. First, instead of considering only the second-largest value, we allow the perturbed position to use the index of the 𝑟 -th largest feature value, where 2 ≤ 𝑟 ≤ 𝑀 . We define ℎ𝑟 𝑖 (𝑞 ) as the function that returns the index of the 𝑟 -th largest element within the sampled subset associated with the 𝑖 -th WTA hash function. Algorithm 1 MP-WTA 𝑟 =3, 𝑁 =3                                                                                                      

> Input: Query vector 𝑞 , Sequence of WTA hash functions ℎ1, . . . , ℎ 𝐾
> Output: Probing sequence Seq of length lenSeq =1+Í𝑁 𝑖 =1
>  𝐾 𝑖
> (𝑟 −1)𝑖 , with 𝑟 =3
> and 𝑁 =3
> 1: Compute h(𝑞 )= ℎ1(𝑞 ), . . . , ℎ 𝐾 (𝑞 )and Seq ← ∅
> 2: for 𝑖 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝐾 }do compute ℎ2
> 𝑖 (𝑞 ), ℎ 3
> 𝑖 (𝑞 )⊲2𝑛𝑑 and 3𝑟𝑑 maximum for all ℎ𝑖
> 3: Seq ← h(𝑞 )
> 4: for 𝑛 ∈ { 1,2,3}do ⊲number of positions to perturb 5: for each subset 𝑆 ⊆ { 1, . . . , 𝐾 }of positions s.t. |𝑆 |=𝑛 do
> 6: for each tuple (𝑟 𝑗 )𝑗 ∈𝑆 with values 𝑟 𝑗 ∈ { 2,3}do
> 7: ˜h←h(𝑞 )⊲copy original hash as the base for perturbation 8: for 𝑗 ∈𝑆 do ˜ℎ𝑗 ←ℎ𝑟 𝑗 𝑗 (𝑞 )⊲replace with 2nd or 3rd maximum 9: Append ˜hto Seq
> 10: return Seq

Second, we allow simultaneous perturbations of up to 𝑁 po-sitions of signature h(𝑞 ), where 1 ≤ 𝑁 ≤ 𝐾 . If the number of perturbed positions is 𝑖 , where 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑁 , then there are  𝐾 𝑖 

 ways to choose the 𝑖 perturbed positions among the 𝐾 signature dimen-sions. For each chosen position, there are (𝑟 − 1) alternative hash values available, namely from the second-largest ℎ2 

> ∗

(𝑞 ) through the 

𝑟 -th largest ℎ𝑟  

> ∗

(𝑞 ). Thus, there are (𝑟 − 1) 𝑖 possible assignments of alternative hash values across the 𝑖 perturbed positions. Given the above, the total length of the probing sequence is 

lenSeq = 1 + Í𝑁 𝑖 =1

 𝐾 𝑖 

 (𝑟 − 1) 𝑖 , where the first term corresponds to the original LSH bucket h(𝑞 ). In our implementation, we set 𝑟 = 3

and 𝑁 = 3. Under these parameters, position 𝑖 of the signature can be replaced by either ℎ2 

> 𝑖

or ℎ3 

> 𝑖

, and up to three positions may be perturbed simultaneously. Algorithm 1 describes our MP-WTA .Note that the parameters are fixed in advance, independently of the training data, yielding an oblivious multi-probe schedule. The full exposition of h(·) , ℎ 2 

> ∗

(·) , ℎ 3 

> ∗

(·) ’s oblivious algorithms are available in Appendix C.1. 

## 5.2 TENNOR Components 

Before describing the components, we fix the public parameters used by TENNOR . Let 𝑃 denote the collection of public parameters known to the adversary. These include the batch size, the NN archi-tecture and layer dimensions, the layer(s) to which LSH is applied, the public LSH parameters, the number of LSH buckets, the public probe-sequence length, the public padding parameter PADSIZE , the public parameters of the OHT , such as the number of bins and the bin capacity, the LSH rebuild period, the optimizer hyperparame-ters, and the current training-step index. For the first layer, we also treat the non-zero feature indices of the input as public. We treat the public number of training steps or batch iterations as part of 

𝑃 . These parameters determine the shapes of intermediate arrays, the bounds of all loops, and the schedule of memory traversals used by the components. All other information is private, including the values of the training data, the values of the model parame-ters, optimizer state, intermediate activations, gradients, and the concrete mapping from requests to buckets and from buckets to fetched neurons. (Refer to Appendix E.2 for additional details.) 

5.2.1 Neuron Requester. In our prototype, TENNOR applies LSH-based adaptive sparsification only to the wide layer, which is wide by nature in the extreme multilabel classification setting and thus 

Algorithm 2 Neuron Reqester for layer ℓ                                                                                        

> Input: Layer index ℓ, batch of input data of size 𝐵 , hash functions ℎ1, . . . , ℎ 𝐾 , and the maximum number of neurons for each Neuron-Buffer , denoted by PADSIZE
> Output: Initialized ReqArray ℓ
> 1: 𝐾 ←# of hash functions at layer ℓ
> 2: lenSeq ℓ←length of probing sequence Seq for the LSH of layer ℓ
> 3: 𝑇 ←𝐵 ·lenSeq ℓ⊲total number of LSH probes for batch 𝐵
> 4: Allocate empty Request-Array ReqArray ℓ[0..𝑇 −1]
> 5: // Run MP–WTA and construct ReqArray
> 6: for each input 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 do
> 7: Seq 𝑖 ←MP-WTA 𝑟 =3, 𝑁 =3(𝑞 𝑖 ,(ℎ1, . . . , ℎ 𝐾 )), where 𝑞 𝑖 is an entry of the batch 8: for 𝑡 =0to lenSeq ℓ−1do
> 9: Index of ReqArray to populate is ind ← ( 𝑖 −1) · lenSeq ℓ+𝑡
> 10: ReqArray ℓ[ind ].LSHbucketID ←Seq 𝑖 [𝑡 ]
> 11: ReqArray ℓ[ind ].Batch-Rank ←𝑖
> 12: ReqArray ℓ[ind ].Neuron-Buffer ←initialize with PADSIZE dummies 13: return ReqArray ℓ

dominates the training cost (see §4). We note that other parameteri-zations of TENNOR may apply LSH to multiple (even all) layers. The term input to the layer being processed by the Neuron Requester refers to the activation vector fed into that layer. Algorithm 2 pro-cesses the batch’s fetch requests for LSH that correspond to NN layer ℓ and creates an intermediate data structure Request-Array .For a batch of 𝐵 inputs, Neuron Requester invokes MP-WTA on each input 𝑞 𝑖 to obtain a probe sequence Seq 𝑖 of length lenSeq ℓ .To preserve obliviousness, the Neuron Requester uses a statically pre-allocated array ReqArray ℓ of 𝑇 = 𝐵 · lenSeq ℓ entries instead of variable-sized data structures, whose dynamic resizing pattern would leak information about the data. The probe/request with lo-cal index 𝑡 for input 𝑖 is placed in the (𝑖 − 1) · lenSeq ℓ + 𝑡 slot of the 

Request-Array . Each entry stores a triplet consisting of ( 𝑖 ) the sig-nature LSHbucketID , ( 𝑖𝑖 ) Batch-Rank , and ( 𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) a Neuron-Buffer 

containing PADSIZE dummies. This way Request-Array has a fixed structure for the subsequent fetch stage, and its layout does not leak information about the input. Although the LSH bucket signa-ture itself depends on the input values, Algorithm 1 computes the signature in a data-oblivious manner. We note that public system parameters 𝑃 fully determine the observable quantities such as the size of ReqArray ℓ , the number of probes issued per input, and the write schedule. Thus, the observable layout and write schedule of the Neuron Requester reveal nothing beyond what is already known via 𝑃 . Notice that lines 6–12 of Algorithm 2 can be further optimized by populating each entry of the Request-Array in parallel since there is no dependence across the content or the computation of 

Request-Array ’s entries. 

5.2.2 Neuron Fetcher. The main design goal of Neuron Fetcher is to populate the Neuron-Buffer for each Request-Array . To do that, buckets from the LSH table need to be retrieved and copied to the memory of Neuron-Buffer . Specifically, Neuron Fetcher’s retrieval step must hide two data-dependent pieces of information: (1) which LSH buckets are accessed during retrieval, and (2) the number of neurons residing in each queried bucket for a given request. TENNOR addresses the latter by padding every LSH bucket to a fixed public PADSIZE capacity with dummy neurons, so that each bucket retrieval fetches the same number of neurons. Hiding which buckets are accessed requires a different mechanism. As described in Section 4.2, for efficiency reasons, TENNOR adopts a reverse-mapping strategy; it iterates over LSH buckets and for each of them it identifies all requests that target it. To achieve the desired security guarantees, we need a data structure that can oblivi-ously map LSH signatures to requests. This is achieved by reorganiz-ing ReqArray ℓ into an Oblivious Two-Tier Hash Table ( OHT ), as pro-posed by Chan et al. [ 19 ]. OHT stores one entry per request. The key is LSHbucketID ; the value is a triplet of LSHbucketID , Batch-Rank ,and Neuron-Buffer . Thus, multiple requests in the batch may ap-pear as distinct OHT entries with the same LSHbucketID .Because the OHT maps keys to bins using a hash function, entries (requests) with different LSHbucketID s may be placed in the same bin due to hash collisions. To allow the fetcher to identify the correct entries when scanning a bin, each stored triplet also records its 

LSHbucketID as a field, in addition to the OHT lookup key. In more detail, Neuron Fetcher linearly scans all LSH buckets, computes the corresponding tier-1 and tier-2 OHT bins for the cur-rent bucket, and linearly inspects the entries in those bins. For each candidate entry, Neuron Fetcher uses: OblCompare [ 32 ], a data-oblivious comparison primitive , to test whether its LSHbucketID 

matches the current LSH bucket; and OblChoose [32 ], a data-oblivious conditional selection+assignment primitive , to copy that bucket’s padded contents into the corresponding Neuron-Buffer (s). (Refer to Section D for details.) After all buckets have been processed, Neu-ron Fetcher obliviously transforms the OHT back to Request-Array ,whose Neuron-Buffer s now hold the retrieved neuron contents. Appendix C.2 details this procedure. The design of Neuron Fetcher is doubly-oblivious . To build the OHT , we instantiate OblSort with Batcher’s bitonic sorting network, whose compare and exchange schedule is fixed and therefore data-independent [8]. As established by Chan et al. [ 19 ], double obliviousness requires that each key of the OHT be queried at most once. This requirement is satisfied naturally by our construction; since each padded LSH bucket is scanned exactly once during the linear pass, no key is ever accessed more than once. Finally, to convert the OHT back into a populated Request-Array , we again apply oblivious sorting. 

Optimization #1 (O1): Deferred Dummy Payload. Recall that during the feedforward phase, the Request-Array must be transformed into an OHT via an oblivious sort operation. At this point, however, the Neuron-Buffer field of each Request-Array ’s triplet is occupied solely by dummy values . Moving these place-holders through the sort operation, i.e., rewriting them alongside the meaningful fields of the triplet, introduces significant overhead (see §7.2) without any security benefit. 

TENNOR optimizes performance based on the above observation by deferring dummy payload instantiation ; during construction, the oblivious sort operates only on the fields LSHbucketID and 

Batch-Rank of the Request-Array . Once all request items have been placed into their target OHT bins, TENNOR initializes every 

Neuron-Buffer with dummy neurons, thereby restoring the fixed-capacity layout required by the subsequent fetch stage. This op-timization preserves obliviousness. Consequently, TENNOR avoids redundant oblivious movement of dummy Neuron-Buffer s with-out affecting the obliviousness of feedforward OHT construction. 

Optimization #2 (O2): Oblivious Parallelization. Our experi-ments in Section 7.2 show that the linear scan of the LSH table that populates the OHT is a performance bottleneck. In this design, each LSH bucket encountered during the scan immediately triggers its corresponding Tier-1 and Tier-2 OHT lookups, forcing LSH bucket iteration and OHT updates to proceed in lockstep. TENNOR breaks this lockstep by deferring all OHT updates to a separate phase after the scan completes, enabling parallel updates across threads. Naively parallelizing across LSH buckets would introduce write contention, since multiple buckets may want to write to the same 

OHT bin. TENNOR eliminates this contention through a two-phase ap-proach. In the first phase, TENNOR iterates over the LSH buckets and initializes a scheduler (in fact, one per OHT tier) that records which LSH buckets map to which bins (as determined by the OHT hash functions). In the second phase, once the LSH iteration completes, 

TENNOR partitions the OHT bins into disjoint regions and assigns each region together with its associated LSH buckets to a dedicated thread, guaranteeing that no two threads write to the same bin. This optimization preserves obliviousness. The scheduler is de-rived from the fixed sequence of LSH bucket indices and the OHT 

hash functions, so its construction has no data-dependent leakage. Notice that this parallel Neuron Fetcher performs the same LSH table iteration, updates the same OHT bins, and applies the same 

oblivious operations as the sequential design. The only difference is the order of OHT updates, not which memory locations are accessed. 

Optimization #3 (O3): OHT Layout Reuse. Both feedforward and backpropagation construct an OHT from scratch over a Request-Array , each incurring multiple rounds of oblivious sorting that our experiments identify as another bottleneck (see §7.2). Since the OHT 

construction in both phases operates on the same set of requests, the request-to-OHT -bin assignment in OHT established during feed-forward remains valid for backpropagation and need not be recom-puted. To support reuse, during the feedforward OHT construction, 

TENNOR records each request’s OHT bin assignment and its position within that bin. During backpropagation, the aforementioned OHT 

assignment reduces the multi-round construction to a single oblivi-ous sort that places each request in its predetermined location. The scheduler for the parallel Neuron Fetcher is also retained, as the bin-to-{LSH-bucket, thread} mappings are unchanged. This optimization preserves obliviousness. The oblivious sorting operation moves the same requests into each bin as the original construction, and the subsequent Neuron Fetcher traverses the same LSH buckets and OHT bins under the same scheduler. The only difference is the direction of data movement; neurons transfer into the OHT during the feedforward pass and move back out during backpropagation. 

5.2.3 Neuron Updater. With the Request-Array fully populated by Neuron Fetcher, the Neuron Updater performs feedforward and backpropagation on the fixed-size Request-Array . Because requests are arranged in an FCFS order within Request-Array , the Neuron Updater processes them by linear scan rather than by a data-dependent traversal. Specifically, for each layer input 𝑖 in a batch and layer number ℓ, TENNOR preallocates two arrays to store each fetched neuron’s network-level index (or NeuronID) and its activation value, namely ActiveNodes [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] and ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ].Both arrays have a fixed capacity of 𝑅 ℓ = lenSeq ℓ · PADSIZE , avoid-ing any data-dependent resizing or compaction during training. During feedforward, the Neuron Updater scans linearly ReqArray ℓ .For each neuron in each request’s Neuron-Buffer , Neuron Updater computes the neuron’s activation from the previous layer’s active neurons, applies the activation function, and records the NeuronID and activation into ActiveNodes [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] and ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ]. During backpropagation, the updater traverses the same order—i.e., it com-putes deltas for each neuron in each request’s Neuron-Buffer —, then runs nested loops whose bounds are determined solely by public parameters 𝑃 to propagate errors and accumulate per-edge weight updates. See Appendix C.3 for more details. The Neuron Updater is oblivious because (1) all loop bounds de-pend solely on the public parameters 𝑃 and (2) it linearly scans and updates the copies of neurons within each individual Request-Array 

entry. Both feedforward and backpropagation follow a fixed, data-independent access pattern. 

5.2.4 Oblivious Neuron Merge and LSH Rebuild. Before write-back, multiple requests may hold duplicate copies of the same neuron with updates from different inputs in the batch. To group these du-plicate copies obliviously, TENNOR first applies OblSort , an oblivious sorting primitive implemented with a fixed data-independent com-pare and exchange pattern (e,g., bitonic sort [ 8 ]). TENNOR resolves these duplicates by obliviously grouping requests by LSHbucketID 

and then linearly scanning and consolidating to a single neuron copy action within each group (retaining the redundant entries as fake writes to preserve security). The merged results are then used to rebuild OHT , which initiates a write-back pass that traverses the same LSH buckets and OHT bins as the feedforward fetch, with only the direction of neuron transfer reversed. 

TENNOR also periodically rebuilds the LSH table by recomputing hash signatures for all neurons and relocating them in the new LSH table. The initial construction adds PADSIZE dummy neurons per LSH bucket. Periodic rebuilds then reuse this fixed dummy reservoir and overflow region while recomputing signatures and running oblivious compaction. The same refresh routine is used for initialization, with fresh dummies added only in that initial call. See Appendix C.4 and Appendix C.6 for more details. 

## 5.3 Implementation 

We implement TENNOR in approximately 5,000 LoC in C++. The entire system runs in user space and requires no modifications to the OS kernel, TEE runtime, or system libraries. The implementa-tion covers the full oblivious training pipeline, including MP-WTA hashing, the Request-Array , the OHT-based Neuron Fetcher, the fixed-shape Neuron Updater, and the oblivious merge and LSH refresh routines. We reuse only the network initialization and data-loading routines from SLIDE’s open-source codebase [22]. For low-level oblivious primitives, we follow the design prin-ciples of Snoopy [ 32 ], which provides data-oblivious scalar and byte operations for TEEs. We extend this approach with oblivious routines for TENNOR ’s specific composite objects, such as request entries and neuron buffers. These routines are implemented within 

TENNOR ’s own codebase rather than by modifying Snoopy’s library. Refer to Appendix D for additional details. 

## 6 Security Guarantees 

Recall that 𝑃 denotes the public parameter set (§5.2, §E.2). We model TENNOR as a two-party computation between a User and an OS/Hypervisor adversary H . The User holds input (𝑃, 𝐷 ), where 

𝐷 is the private training data; the Hypervisor holds input 𝑃 .

Real World. The parties execute protocol 𝜋 TENNOR in the TD. The User sends (𝑃, 𝐷 ) to the TD, which runs TENNOR and returns the trained model 𝑀 to the User. The Hypervisor is passive. Its view consists of the public input 𝑃 together with the memory-access trace 

𝜏 observed during execution. We write view 𝜋 TENNOR  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 ) = {𝑃, 𝜏 }.

Ideal World. The parties interact only through the functionality 

Ftrain 

(𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃  = 𝑀, ⊥. On input (( 𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃 ), the functionality 

Ftrain returns the trained model 𝑀 to the User and returns ⊥ to the Hypervisor. We say that 𝜋 TENNOR securely realizes Ftrain if there exists a PPT simulator S such that, for all 𝑃 and all 𝐷 consistent with 

𝑃 , the joint output distribution in the ideal world is computationally indistinguishable from that in the real world. 

Ideal Ftrain ,S (𝜅 ; (𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃 ) ≈ Real 𝜋 TENNOR ,H (𝜅 ; (𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃 )

In our setting, the Hypervisor output is ⊥ in both worlds, and the security argument focuses on the information leaked through the Hypervisor’s view, namely 𝜏 . The proof shows that the real Hypervisor view can be simulated from the public parameters 𝑃 

alone—i.e., 𝜏 does not reveal information beyond the leakage ex-plicitly included in 𝑃 . Equivalently, TENNOR securely realizes Ftrain 

if there exists a PPT simulator S that, given only 𝑃 , produces a simulated Hypervisor view such that 

{S( 𝑃 )} ≈ 𝑐 {view 𝜋 TENNOR  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 )} .

We prove Theorem 1 in the hybrid model [16 ], where self-contained primitives (i.e., oblivious sort, comparison, and hash table; see Ap-pendix D) are abstracted as ideal functionalities. Specifically, we prove that TENNOR is secure given access to these functionalities ; each is then replaced by its corresponding protocol, which implements the functionality and whose security follows from prior work. 

Theorem 1. [Informal] Assume that each underlying oblivious prim-itive securely realizes its corresponding functionality. TENNOR then securely realizes Ftrain against the Hypervisor in the hybrid model [ 16 ]. 

Proof Sketch. The proof is modular. We first analyze TENNOR 

in a primitive hybrid model where the low-level oblivious prim-itives are replaced by functionalities. In this model, each main component of TENNOR , namely Neuron Requester, Neuron Fetcher, Neuron Updater, and the LSH initialization and refresh routines, is simulatable from the public parameters 𝑃 alone. By the security of the underlying primitives, replacing these functionalities with their real protocols preserves security. Hence, each real component securely realizes its corresponding functionality. Modular compo-sition then gives a secure batch step. Sequential composition over the public training schedule, including initialization, batch steps, and refresh events, yields the security of 𝜋 TENNOR . The optimized Fetcher schedules O1–O3 preserve the same leakage claim because they add only public object-size, parallelization, and layout-reuse metadata. The full proof appears in Appendix E. □

## 7 Evaluation 

We evaluate TENNOR to: (1) experimentally demonstrate the benefits of our approach and quantify the overall speedup over a baseline SLIDE+ORAM, which runs SLIDE [ 22 ] “as is” on top of a generic ORAM compiler [ 98 ] (see §7.1); (2) attribute performance gains to individual optimizations (O1–O3, see §5.2.2) via progressive ablations and runtime breakdowns (see §7.2); and (3) measure the Table 1: Overview of Evaluation Datasets. 

Dataset Feature-dim. # Labels #Train #Test Wiki10-31K 101,938 30,938 14,146 6,616 Amz-Sub 135,909 92,814 42,438 14,146 Wiki-325K 1,617,899 325,056 1,778,351 587,084 Amz-670K 135,909 670,091 490,449 153,025 accuracy of MP-WTA compared to standard LSH (see §7.3). The neural networks we train have a wide layer with 30K to 325K neurons. 

Testbed. All experiments were conducted on one of two servers. For the performance and ablation experiments (1)–(2), we use a Google Cloud Confidential C3 instance equipped with 2 ×22-core/44-thread CPUs (Intel Sapphire Rapids) and 352 GB of RAM, running Ubuntu 24.04 LTS as a confidential VM image with Intel TDX as the TEE, and supporting AVX, AVX2, and AVX-512 instructions. For the accuracy evaluation (3), we use a bare-metal x86-64 server (64-core AMD EPYC 7763 Zen 3) without a TEE, as accuracy evaluation does not require secure execution. TENNOR is implemented in C++ (see §5.3) and compiled with GCC v13.3, with OpenMP enabled for multi-threaded parallelism. In addition, we enable AVX2/FMA sup-port when available. Our oblivious primitives use inline assembly that is preserved at any optimization level. We compile without op-timization flags ( -O0 under GCC) as an additional safeguard against compiler-introduced data-dependent branches for all tests. 

Datasets. We use datasets from the Extreme Multi-Label Clas-sification (XC) repository [ 11 ], as established in prior work [ 22 ]. For large-scale evaluation, we use WikiLSHTC-325K (Wiki-325K), a Wikipedia-derived dataset with 325K label categories. We also include Wiki10-31K, our smallest dataset, to evaluate TENNOR under a more constrained label space. Finally, we construct Amazon-Sub, a curated subset of Amazon-670K, with label cardinality falling between that of Wiki10-31K and Wiki-325K, serving as a medium-scale dataset. Together, the three datasets enable the evaluation of 

TENNOR across small, medium, and large label regimes that require a wide layer for the classification. Key statistics are in Table 1. 

## 7.1 TENNOR vs. SLIDE+ORAM 

Baseline. We compare TENNOR against SLIDE+ORAM , which uses Path ORAM [ 98 ] to store and access all neurons and LSH buckets used by SLIDE. We adopt Path ORAM as our baseline because it is an extremely simple tree-based ORAM construction, and has been widely used in secure-processor and enclave systems both in academia [ 87 , 88 , 98 , 99 ] and the industry [ 25 ]. In this baseline, neurons and LSH buckets are stored in a uniform representation on the ORAM server. Whenever SLIDE needs to read or write a neuron or an LSH bucket, it issues a corresponding ORAM access request through the ORAM client. As discussed in Section 2.2, the ORAM client’s memory accesses to the stash may still be observable via side-channels, even when running inside a TEE. To avoid the leakage from the stash accesses, the SLIDE+ORAM baseline performs a full linear scan over the stash on every access, avoiding data-dependent access patterns—a stan-dard technique proposed by Mishra et al. [ 71 ]. Additionally, the baseline pads the number of neuron accesses per input to a fixed upper bound (i.e., the LSH bucket size) to conceal the distribution of retrieved neurons. We emphasize that this baseline is not doubly-oblivious (and thus has the potential to be faster) yet it represents a state-of-the-practice implementation that does not consider eliminating access-pattern leakage. Specifically, while it provides obliviousness for ORAM-backed storage accesses, it does not make the SLIDE computation itself oblivious: after retrieving neurons or buckets via the ORAM client, SLIDE’s internal control flow and memory accesses still depend on the input, leaking information about the training data. The baseline uses the same parameters as TENNOR (i.e., neural network architecture, LSH hash function count, and batch size), except that the number of LSH tables is 50, whereas TENNOR uses the newly proposed MP-WTA with only 1 hash table. All components— the neural network, Path ORAM, and SLIDE—run inside TDX. 

Parameters. For all three datasets, we adopt the fully connected neural network with one wide hidden layer, similarly to the work of Chen et al. [ 22 , 30 ]. For the chosen learning task, the wide layer is the output layer (i.e., where LSH is applied), which contains 30K, 90K, and 325K neurons for the Wiki-10, Amz-Sub, and Wiki-325 datasets, respectively. As for the hidden layer, we chose a width of 128 for Amazon-Sub and Wiki-325K, matching the configuration used in prior work [ 22 , 30 ]. Since Wiki10-31K is an additional dataset not evaluated in that work, we use a slightly larger hidden layer (256) to obtain a reasonable model capacity on this smaller label space while keeping the overall architecture consistent. We fix the batch size to 32 across all datasets. This is dictated by our testbed constraints: Wiki-325K is our largest workload, and larger batch sizes exceed the available RAM when accounting for model state and associated data structures. Fixing the batch size also keeps comparisons consistent across datasets. For LSH, we use WTA for the SLIDE+ORAM baseline and MP-WTA 

for TENNOR , applied to the output layer only, which is the primary computational bottleneck [ 22 ]. We select 𝐾 via accuracy-driven tuning over a small set of candidates, yielding 𝐾 = 3, 4, and 5 for Wiki10-31K, Amazon-Sub, and Wiki-325K, respectively, and use these values throughout all performance experiments. To keep the Google Cloud infrastructure costs manageable, we benchmark a fixed window of 1,280 training inputs per dataset and configuration, reporting mean per-batch runtime over this window. We estimate end-to-end training time by scaling this mean by the total number of batches in each dataset’s training schedule, determined by dataset size and epoch count. We evaluate TENNOR 

with 8, 22, and 44 threads, corresponding to real Google Cloud confidential computing configurations with varying core counts. 

Performance Results. Table 2 compares the mean per-batch runtime of TENNOR against the baseline ( SLIDE+ORAM ) at batch size 32. Across all datasets, TENNOR achieves 1–3 orders-of-magnitude speedup, with gains increasing with additional CPU resources, re-flecting effective parallelization of the dominant components. The baseline, by contrast, relies on a standard Path ORAM implemen-tation with serialized accesses, so additional vCPUs offer limited benefit; we hence report a single baseline measurement per dataset. On Wiki10-31K, the baseline takes 2.6 h, while TENNOR reduces runtime to 681 s, 338 s, and 248 s with 8, 22, and 44 vCPUs, corre-sponding to speedups of 13.7 ×, 27.6 ×, and 37 ×, respectively. On Amazon-Sub, TENNOR cuts the baseline runtime of 16 h down to Table 2: Per-Batch Runtime (avg. over 1,280 inputs, batch size = 32). Speedup (SU) is relative to SLIDE+ORAM on the same dataset. Epoch (Ep.) time is extrapolated from mean batch time and epoch batch count. The baseline uses a sequential Path ORAM that does not benefit from multiple vCPUs. 

Dataset Method #Thd Batch(s) SU Ep.(h) Wiki10 

SLIDE+ORAM 1 2.6 h 1.0 × 1,149 

TENNOR 

8 681.3 s 13.7 × 83.6 22 338.8 s 27.6 × 41.6 44 248.3 s 37 × 30.5 Amz-Sub 

SLIDE+ORAM 1 16 h 1.0 × 21,216 

TENNOR 

8 2,085.5 s 27 × 768.2 22 1,007.8 s 57.1 × 371.2 44 695.7 s 82.7 × 256.5 Wiki325 

SLIDE+ORAM 1 208 h 1.0 × 1.15x 10 7

TENNOR 

8 4,717.8 s 157.2 × 72,828 22 2,255.4 s 328.8 × 34,816 44 1,578.3 s 469.9 × 24,364 8 22 44   

> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> Amz-Sub
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> Wiki325
> Requester
> Fetcher
> Updater

(a) Total 8 22 44    

> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> Amz-Sub
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> Wiki325
> OHT
> LSH scan
> ReqTrans

(b) Fetcher 

Figure 2: Breakdown of Runtime (Total and Fetcher) across datasets and thread counts with batch size = 32. 

2,085 s, 1,007 s, and 695 s (8, 22, and 44 vCPUs), achieving speedups of 27 ×–82.7 ×. Although scaling is sublinear due to residual serial work and contention on shared, memory-intensive data structures, the absolute reduction in wall-clock time remains substantial across all core counts. On the larger Wiki-325K workload, the baseline requires 208 h, whereas TENNOR completes the same run in 4,717 s, 2,255 s, and 1,578 s with 8, 22, and 44 vCPUs, yielding speedups of 157.2 ×, 328.8 ×, and 469.9 ×.

These results demonstrate that TENNOR makes training more feasi-ble for substantially larger XC problems [ 11 ] where a Path ORAM-based approach becomes prohibitively slow. 

Following Table 2, we break down the mean per-batch runtime into major components to identify where time is spent. Figure 2 reports this component-level breakdown under the same measure-ment window. As shown in Figure 2a, the Neuron Fetcher dominates runtime, while the Neuron Requester, Neuron Updater, and remain-ing operations contribute negligible overhead, barely registering in the figure. Motivated by this, Figure 2b further decomposes the 

Table 3: Runtime on Wiki10-31K and Amazon-Sub (batch size = 64). Wiki-325K is omitted due to RAM constraints. 

Dataset Method #Thd Batch(s) SU Ep.(h) Wiki10 

SLIDE+ORAM 1 5.2 h 1.0 × 1,149 

TENNOR 

8 1,655.8 s 11.3 × 101.6 22 795.9 s 23.5 × 48.8 44 565.4 s 33.1 × 34.7 Amz-Sub 

SLIDE+ORAM 1 32 h 1.0 × 21,216 

TENNOR 

8 11,496.9 s 10 × 2,117.3 22 5,185.5 s 22.2 × 954.9 44 3,514.4 s 32.7 × 647.2 8 22 44   

> Threads
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> Amz-Sub
> Requester
> Fetcher
> Updater

(a) Total 8 22 44    

> Threads
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> Amz-Sub
> OHT
> LSH scan
> ReqTrans

(b) Fetcher 

Figure 3: Breakdown of Runtime (Total and Fetcher) across datasets and thread counts with batch size = 64. 

Neuron Fetcher into its internal stages. OHT construction and OHT-to-request conversion each account for nearly half of the Fetcher time, as both are dominated by computationally intensive oblivi-ous sorting. The LSH scanning stage, by contrast, contributes only a small fraction of the Fetcher runtime. Overall, this breakdown pinpoints the post-optimization bottlenecks and motivates the pro-gressive ablation analysis in Section 7.2. 

Batch-Size Sensitivity. We additionally evaluate a larger batch size of 64 on Wiki10-31K and Amazon-Sub (Table 3); Wiki-325K is omitted due to memory constraints on our evaluation testbed. While 

TENNOR continues to deliver substantial speedups (10 ×–33.1 ×), the gains are smaller than at batch size 32. As shown in Figure 3, this trend is consistent with the breakdown in Figure 2: the Neuron Fetcher is dominated by sort-heavy stages (OHT construction and OHT-to-request conversion) whose cost grows superlinearly with the number of items processed and becomes increasingly memory-bound at larger batch sizes. Hence, increasing the batch size ampli-fies the overhead of these stages and reduces parallel efficiency. Training with a large effective batch size ( 𝐵 eff ) is nonetheless achievable using small micro-batches via gradient accumulation [ 38 ,46 , 77 ]: 𝐵 eff = 𝐵 micro ×accum_steps . Based on our evaluation, TENNOR 

can fix 𝐵 micro = 32 to maximize hardware efficiency and avoid the superlinear memory and computational overheads associated with larger micro-batches. Although we do not explicitly evaluate gradi-ent accumulation in this work, it provides a straightforward mech-anism to scale to the effective batch sizes required for convergence without increasing per-step system cost. 8 22 44   

> Threads
> 0
> 15
> 30
> 45
> 60
> 75
> 90
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 15
> 30
> 45
> 60
> 75
> 90
> Amz-Sub
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 15
> 30
> 45
> 60
> 75
> 90
> Wiki325
> Requester
> Slowdown
> Fetcher
> Updater

(a) Total 8 22 44    

> Threads
> 0
> 15
> 30
> 45
> 60
> 75
> 90
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 15
> 30
> 45
> 60
> 75
> 90
> Amz-Sub
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 15
> 30
> 45
> 60
> 75
> 90
> Wiki325
> Slowdown
> OHT
> LSH scan
> ReqTrans

(b) Fetcher 

Figure 4: Breakdown of Runtime (Total and Fetcher) without O1 (Deferred Dummy Payload) across datasets and thread counts with batch size = 32. ( NO-Opt-Payload-Deferral )8 22 44   

> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> 56
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> 56
> Amz-Sub
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> 56
> Wiki325
> Requester
> Slowdown
> Fetcher
> Updater

(a) Total 8 22 44    

> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> 56
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> 56
> Amz-Sub
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> 56
> Wiki325
> OHT
> Slowdown
> LSH scan
> ReqTrans

(b) Fetcher 

Figure 5: Breakdown of Runtime (Total and Fetcher) with-out O2 (Oblivious Parallelization) across datasets and thread counts with batch size = 32. ( NO-Opt-ParallelScan )

## 7.2 Optimization Ablations 

We evaluate the performance impact of each optimization described in Section 5.2.2 using an ablation study. Unless stated otherwise, 

All-Opt enables all optimizations, and each ablated variant disables exactly one optimization while keeping the rest enabled. 

Impact of O1 (Deferred Dummy Payload). NO-Opt-Payload-Deferral disables optimization O1 (i.e., deferred dummy payload). Figure 4 shows the runtime breakdown, with the red segment rep-resenting the slowdown relative to All-Opt . Materializing dummy neuron payloads eagerly during OHT construction doubles the run-time, with the overhead concentrated in the OHT building stage. 

Impact of O2 (Oblivious Parallelization). NO-Opt-ParallelScan 

disables optimization O2 (i.e., oblivious parallelization), reverting the Neuron Fetcher to a sequential LSH linear scan. Figure 5 shows the runtime breakdown, with the red segment indicating the over-head introduced by disabling this optimization. As the dataset size increases, both the LSH tables and the intermediate OHT grow, am-plifying the cost of sequential scanning. Furthermore, as more threads are provisioned, the sequential scan becomes an increas-ingly dominant fraction of end-to-end runtime, since the remaining components parallelize well while the scan itself does not. 

Impact of O3 (OHT Layout Reuse). NO-Opt-OHTReuse dis-ables optimization O3 (i.e., OHT layout reuse), rebuilding the back-propagation OHT from scratch using the standard construction pro-cedure. Figure 6 shows the runtime breakdown, with the red seg-ment indicating the overhead relative to All-Opt . Disabling layout 8 22 44   

> Threads
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Amz-Sub
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Wiki325
> Requester
> Slowdown
> Fetcher
> Updater

(a) Total 8 22 44    

> Threads
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> Time (10 2 s)  Wiki10
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> Amz-Sub
> 822 44
> Threads
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> Wiki325
> Slowdown
> OHT
> LSH scan
> ReqTrans

(b) Fetcher 

Figure 6: Breakdown of Runtime (Total and Fetcher) without O3 (OHT Layout Reuse) across datasets and thread counts with batch size = 32. ( NO-Opt-OHTReuse )

reuse incurs additional oblivious sorting and placement overhead, nearly doubling the OHT build time, 

## 7.3 Accuracy of MP-WTA 

We evaluate predictive accuracy at the algorithm level, comparing 

MP-WTA against standard LSH under identical training hyperparam-eters. Accordingly, we report accuracy using the baseline SLIDE 

implementation and its MP-WTA variant without TENNOR ’s secure-execution mechanisms (TEE/oblivious primitives), as our system transformations are semantics-preserving and affect only memory-access patterns. Thus, any accuracy differences observed here are attributable solely to the hashing scheme. Models range from 10M to over 100M parameters, with computation dominated by the final classification layer, isolating the effect of replacing standard LSH with MP-WTA on predictive performance across XC tasks. 

Setup. We isolate the effect of hashing by training two otherwise-identical models per dataset, sharing the same architecture, opti-mizer, and training schedule, and differing only in the final-layer hash function (WTA vs. MP-WTA). Unless stated otherwise, we use the same model configuration and hashing settings as in the performance evaluation (§7.1), with batch size as the only exception. Hashing is applied only to the final classification layer. 

Hashing. We adopt the dataset-specific 𝐾 from prior SLIDE work for Amazon-670K and Wiki-325K [ 30 ], and use the same values in our performance evaluation. For Wiki10-31K and Amazon-Sub, we select 𝐾 via a lightweight sweep and fix it for both WTA and MP-WTA. Concretely, 𝐾 = 3, 4, 5, 6 for Wiki10-31K, Amazon-Sub, Wiki-325K, and Amazon-670K, respectively. We cap WTA at 𝐿 = 50 

tables and set MP-WTA to a single table ( 𝐿 = 1), reflecting our compute/memory budget and testing whether MP-WTA retains accuracy with far fewer tables. Unless stated otherwise, MP-WTA uses multi-probe parameters 𝑟 = 3, 𝑁 = 3.

Hyperparameters. Each dataset uses a fully connected net-work with a single hidden layer, trained with Adam (learning rate 

10 −4) [ 53 ]. Batch size is 128 for Amazon-670K, Wiki-325K, and Amazon-Sub, and 32 for Wiki10-31K. 

Results. We report Precision at 1 (P@1)—i.e., the fraction of test samples whose top-predicted label matches a ground-truth label, following prior work [ 22 , 30 ]. The results are averaged over 5 independent runs. As shown in Figure 7, across all four datasets, the MP–WTA ( 𝑟 = 3, 𝑁 = 3) (1HT) curve closely tracks the WTA 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 

> Epoch
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> Accuracy
> Wiki10-31k
> WTA 50HT
> MP-WTA 1HT

(a) Wiki10-31K 0 5 10 15 20 25 30  

> Epoch
> 0.2
> 0.4
> Accuracy
> Wiki-325K
> WTA 50HT
> MP-WTA 1HT

(b) Wiki-325K 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 

> Epoch
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> Accuracy
> Amazon-670K
> WTA 50HT
> MP-WTA 1HT

(c) Amazon-670K 0 10 20 30  

> Epoch
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> Accuracy
> Amazon-Sub
> WTA 50HT
> MP-WTA 1HT

(d) Amazon-Sub 

Figure 7: Epoch-wise classification accuracy comparing WTA (𝐿 =50 ) and MP-WTA ( 𝑟 =3, 𝑁 =3, 𝐿 =1) across all four datasets. All methods use window size 𝑀 =8.0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0  

> Time (10 3s)
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> Accuracy
> Wiki10-31K
> WTA 50HT
> MP-WTA 1HT

(a) Wiki10-31K 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0   

> Time (10 5s)
> 0.2
> 0.4
> Accuracy
> Wiki-325K
> WTA 50HT
> MP-WTA 1HT

(b) Wiki-325K 0 1 2 3 4 

> Time (10 4s)
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> Accuracy
> Amazon-670K
> WTA 50HT
> MP-WTA 1HT

(c) Amazon-670K 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5   

> Time (10 3s)
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> Accuracy
> Amazon-Sub
> WTA 50HT
> MP-WTA 1HT

(d) Amazon-Sub 

Figure 8: Training time vs. classification accuracy compar-ing WTA ( 𝐿 =50 ) and MP-WTA ( 𝑟 =3, 𝑁 =3, 𝐿 =1) across all four datasets. All methods use window size 𝑀 =8.

(50HT) baseline over training epochs. The gap narrows quickly in early epochs and remains small thereafter; in several cases the two curves become nearly indistinguishable by around ten epochs. With the window size held fixed, multi-probe substitutes for table multiplicity, yielding comparable accuracy while requiring roughly 

50 × fewer hash tables and proportionally less hash-table memory. We also show the time vs. accuracy results. Figure 8 uses the same runs as Figure 7, with epochs converted to wall-clock time. 

Compared with the WTA, MP-WTA not only reduces storage require-ments but also accelerates training time by using a single LSH table. 

## 8 Related Work 

TEEs for ML. A substantial body of work leverages TEEs to protect models and inputs during ML training and deployment, typically via enclave-based ML services, model offloading, obfuscation, or partitioning across TEE/GPU configurations [ 7, 47 , 79 , 81 , 100 , 106 ]. TEESlice [ 62 ] further demonstrates that when adversaries have access to public pre-trained models, such inference-time protections may fail. However, these methods primarily target model/input protection or inference-time threats , and do not address end-to-end 

training-time leakage through data-dependent access patterns. 

Obliviousness for Learning. Prior studies have shown that en-clave isolation alone is insufficient when attackers can observe mem-ory access patterns. In response, researchers introduced algorithm-specific oblivious components for select learning tasks [ 82 ], in-cluding federated aggregation with sparsification [ 51 ]. Sparse and embedding-based models are especially vulnerable because their ac-cess patterns can reveal private features [ 43 ]. TENNOR treats training-time access-pattern leakage as a core threat and co-designs a dynamic sparse-training pipeline with integrated oblivious primitives, rather than safeguarding a single algorithm or aggregation step. 

Oblivious Primitives and Operators. ORAM, O 2RAM, and oblivi-ous data structures provide foundational access-hiding primitives [ 5,71 , 98 , 99 , 116 ]. LAORAM [ 85 ], in contrast, optimizes access locality in embedding-table training by grouping anticipated future ac-cesses. Recent oblivious sorting, shuffling, and TEE-based parallel relational operators further improve the scalability of sorting- and operator-heavy routines [ 3, 40 , 68 , 80 ]. These works complement 

TENNOR at the primitive/operator level, while TENNOR presents a 

system-level solution for dynamic, sparse training. 

Cryptographic PPML (MPC/HE). Approaches based on secure multiparty computation (MPC) and homomorphic encryption (HE) provide strong privacy guarantees without relying on trusted hard-ware, but tend to incur high computational costs, especially at scale [ 36 , 49 , 75 , 76 , 86 , 104 , 105 ]. TENNOR instead leverages TEEs for isolation and incorporates data-oblivious primitives, occupying a more practical point in the design space that balances privacy and performance for real-world training tasks. 

## 9 Conclusion 

We presented TENNOR , a CPU-friendly training system that enables the training of wide (and potentially sparse) neural networks within TEEs, while eliminating access-pattern leakage across the whole memory hierarchy, including both enclave and external memory. 

TENNOR achieves this by co-designing the training pipeline with double-oblivious building blocks. It combines ORAM-backed stor-age with oblivious algorithms and data structures that make the memory behavior of each training iteration independent of the underlying data and model state. A key lesson from TENNOR is that practicality hinges on system-level co-optimization. Naively wrap-ping training with a baseline ORAM incurs prohibitive overhead, whereas exploiting the structure of training can substantially re-duce redundant work and bring overhead to a more manageable level. Our evaluation demonstrates that TENNOR significantly out-performs standard Path ORAM-based baselines. TENNOR provides stable, end-to-end performance across datasets and thread config-urations, while preserving the intended leakage profile. Looking forward, TENNOR is well-positioned to benefit from advances in TEE-friendly oblivious sorting and next-generation DORAM primi-tives, which can further accelerate the sort-heavy components that dominate today’s costs. References 

[1] AMD. 2020. Strengthening VM Isolation with Integrity Protection and More. White paper (SEV-SNP). https://docs.amd.com/v/u/en-US/SEV-SNP-strength ening-vm-isolation-with-integrity-protection-and-more [2] Alexandr Andoni, Piotr Indyk, Thijs Laarhoven, Ilya Razenshteyn, and Ludwig Schmidt. 2015. Practical and optimal LSH for angular distance. Advances in neural information processing systems 28 (2015). [3] Gilad Asharov, TH Hubert Chan, Kartik Nayak, Rafael Pass, Ling Ren, and Elaine Shi. 2020. Bucket oblivious sort: An extremely simple oblivious sort. In 

Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms . SIAM, 8–14. [4] Gilad Asharov, Ilan Komargodski, Wei-Kai Lin, Kartik Nayak, Enoch Peserico, and Elaine Shi. 2020. OptORAMa: optimal oblivious RAM. In Advances in Cryptology–EUROCRYPT 2020: 39th Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Zagreb, Croatia, May 10–14, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 30 . Springer, 403–432. [5] Gilad Asharov, Ilan Komargodski, and Yehuda Michelson. 2023. Futorama: A concretely efficient hierarchical oblivious ram. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 3313–3327. [6] Rohit Babbar and Bernhard Schölkopf. 2017. Dismec: Distributed sparse ma-chines for extreme multi-label classification. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM international conference on web search and data mining . 721–729. [7] Juyang Bai, Md Hafizul Islam Chowdhuryy, Jingtao Li, Fan Yao, Chaitali Chakrabarti, and Deliang Fan. 2025. Phantom: Privacy-Preserving Deep Neural Network Model Obfuscation in Heterogeneous TEE and GPU System. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 2025), Seattle, WA, USA, August 13-15, 2025 , Lujo Bauer and Giancarlo Pellegrino (Eds.). USENIX Association, 5565– 5582. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity25/presentation/bai-juyang [8] Kenneth E Batcher. 1968. Sorting networks and their applications. In Proceedings of the April 30–May 2, 1968, spring joint computer conference . 307–314. [9] Roberto J Bayardo, Yiming Ma, and Ramakrishnan Srikant. 2007. Scaling up all pairs similarity search. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide Web . 131–140. [10] Emmanuel Bengio, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Joelle Pineau, and Doina Precup. 2015. Conditional computation in neural networks for faster models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06297 (2015). [11] K. Bhatia, K. Dahiya, H. Jain, P. Kar, A. Mittal, Y. Prabhu, and M. Varma. 2016. The extreme classification repository: Multi-label datasets and code. http: //manikvarma.org/downloads/XC/XMLRepository.html [12] Daniel Blackley, Nathaniel Moyer, Charalampos Papamanthou, and Evgenios M. Kornaropoulos. 2026. How Query Distribution Knowledge Breaks Multidimen-sional Encrypted Range Queries, With Guarantees. arXiv:2508.11563 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.11563 [13] Thomas Bourgeat, Ilia Lebedev, Andrew Wright, Sizhuo Zhang, Arvind, and Srinivas Devadas. 2019. Mi6: Secure enclaves in a speculative out-of-order processor. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture . 42–56. [14] Ferdinand Brasser, Urs Müller, Alexandra Dmitrienko, Kari Kostiainen, Srdjan Capkun, and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. 2017. Software grand exposure: {SGX }

cache attacks are practical. In 11th USENIX workshop on offensive technologies (WOOT 17) .[15] Andrei Z Broder, Moses Charikar, Alan M Frieze, and Michael Mitzenmacher. 1998. Min-wise independent permutations. In Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing . 327–336. [16] Ran Canetti. 2000. Security and composition of multiparty cryptographic protocols. Journal of CRYPTOLOGY 13, 1 (2000), 143–202. [17] David Cash, Paul Grubbs, Jason Perry, and Thomas Ristenpart. 2015. Leakage-Abuse Attacks Against Searchable Encryption. In Proc. of the 22nd ACM CCS .668–679. [18] Javad Ghareh Chamani, Ioannis Demertzis, Dimitrios Papadopoulos, Charalam-pos Papamanthou, and Rasool Jalili. 2023. GraphOS: Towards Oblivious Graph Processing. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 16, 13 (2023), 4324–4338. [19] T-H Hubert Chan, Yue Guo, Wei-Kai Lin, and Elaine Shi. 2017. Oblivious hashing revisited, and applications to asymptotically efficient ORAM and OPRAM. In 

Advances in Cryptology–ASIACRYPT 2017: 23rd International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptology and Information Security, Hong Kong, China, December 3-7, 2017, Proceedings, Part I 23 . Springer, 660–690. [20] Moses S. Charikar. 2002. Similarity Estimation Techniques from Rounding Algorithms. In Proceedings of the thirty-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing .[21] Beidi Chen, Zichang Liu, Binghui Peng, Zhaozhuo Xu, Jonathan Lingjie Li, Tri Dao, Zhao Song, Anshumali Shrivastava, and Christopher Re. 2020. Mongoose: A learnable lsh framework for efficient neural network training. In International Conference on Learning Representations .[22] Beidi Chen, Tharun Medini, James Farwell, Charlie Tai, Anshumali Shrivastava, et al . 2020. Slide: In defense of smart algorithms over hardware acceleration for large-scale deep learning systems. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 

2 (2020), 291–306. [23] Sanchuan Chen, Xiaokuan Zhang, Michael K Reiter, and Yinqian Zhang. 2017. Detecting privileged side-channel attacks in shielded execution with Déjá Vu. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communi-cations Security . 7–18. [24] Pau-Chen Cheng, Wojciech Ozga, Enriquillo Valdez, Salman Ahmed, Zhongshu Gu, Hani Jamjoom, Hubertus Franke, and James Bottomley. 2024. Intel tdx demystified: A top-down approach. Comput. Surveys 56, 9 (2024), 1–33. [25] Graeme Connell. 2022. Technology Deep Dive: Building a Faster ORAM Layer for Enclaves. https://signal.org/blog/building- faster- oram/. Accessed: 2026-04-17. [26] Victor Costan and Srinivas Devadas. 2016. Intel SGX explained. Cryptology ePrint Archive (2016). [27] Victor Costan, Ilia Lebedev, and Srinivas Devadas. 2016. Sanctum: Minimal hardware extensions for strong software isolation. In 25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 16) . 857–874. [28] Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. 2016. Deep neural networks for youtube recommendations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on recommender systems . 191–198. [29] Natacha Crooks, Matthew Burke, Ethan Cecchetti, Sitar Harel, Rachit Agarwal, and Lorenzo Alvisi. 2018. Obladi: Oblivious serializable transactions in the cloud. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18) . 727–743. [30] Shabnam Daghaghi, Tharun Medini, Nicholas Meisburger, Beidi Chen, Mengnan Zhao, and Anshumali Shrivastava. 2021. A tale of two efficient and informa-tive negative sampling distributions. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2319–2329. [31] Marc Damie, Florian Hahn, Andreas Peter, and Jan Ramon. 2025. Secure Sparse Matrix Multiplications and their Applications to Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14894 (2025). [32] Emma Dauterman, Vivian Fang, Ioannis Demertzis, Natacha Crooks, and Raluca Ada Popa. 2021. Snoopy: Surpassing the scalability bottleneck of oblivi-ous storage. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles . 655–671. [33] Saba Eskandarian and Matei Zaharia. 2017. Oblidb: Oblivious query processing for secure databases. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.00458 (2017). [34] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. 2022. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research 23, 120 (2022), 1–39. [35] Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. 2018. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03635 

(2018). [36] Ran Gilad-Bachrach, Nathan Dowlin, Kim Laine, Kristin Lauter, Michael Naehrig, and John Wernsing. 2016. Cryptonets: Applying neural networks to encrypted data with high throughput and accuracy. In International confer-ence on machine learning . PMLR, 201–210. [37] Oded Goldreich and Rafail Ostrovsky. 1996. Software protection and simulation on oblivious RAMs. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 43, 3 (1996), 431–473. [38] Priya Goyal, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Pieter Noordhuis, Lukasz Wesolowski, Aapo Kyrola, Andrew Tulloch, Yangqing Jia, and Kaiming He. 2017. Accu-rate, Large Minibatch SGD: Training ImageNet in 1 Hour . Technical Report arXiv:1706.02677. Facebook AI Research. https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.02677 [39] P. Grubbs, M. Lacharité, B. Minaud, and K. G. Paterson. 2019. Learning to Reconstruct: Statistical Learning Theory and Encrypted Database Attacks. In 

Proc. of the 40th IEEE S&P . 496–512. [40] Tianyao Gu, Yilei Wang, Afonso Tinoco, Bingnan Chen, Ke Yi, and Elaine Shi. 2025. Flexway O-Sort: Enclave-Friendly and Optimal Oblivious Sorting. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 2025), Seattle, WA, USA, August 13-15, 2025 , Lujo Bauer and Giancarlo Pellegrino (Eds.). USENIX Association, 7563– 7582. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity25/presentation/gu-tianyao [41] Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. 2015. Deep compression: Com-pressing deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149 (2015). [42] Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William Dally. 2015. Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural network. Advances in neural information processing systems 28 (2015). [43] Hanieh Hashemi, Wenjie Xiong, Liu Ke, Kiwan Maeng, Murali Annavaram, G Edward Suh, and Hsien-Hsin S Lee. 2022. Data leakage via access patterns of sparse features in deep learning-based recommendation systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06264 (2022). [44] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 770–778. [45] Torsten Hoefler, Dan Alistarh, Tal Ben-Nun, Nikoli Dryden, and Alexandra Peste. 2021. Sparsity in deep learning: Pruning and growth for efficient inference and training in neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research 22, 241 (2021), 1–124. [46] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Mia Xu Chen, Dehao Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V. Le, Yonghui Wu, and Zhifeng Chen. 2019. GPipe: Easy Scaling with Micro-Batch Pipeline Parallelism. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , Vol. 32. [47] Tyler Hunt, Congzheng Song, Reza Shokri, Vitaly Shmatikov, and Emmett Witchel. 2018. Chiron: Privacy-preserving machine learning as a service. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05961 (2018). [48] Piotr Indyk and Rajeev Motwani. 1998. Approximate nearest neighbors: towards removing the curse of dimensionality. In Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing . 604–613. [49] Chiraag Juvekar, Vinod Vaikuntanathan, and Anantha Chandrakasan. 2018. 

{GAZELLE }: A low latency framework for secure neural network inference. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18) . 1651–1669. [50] Matti Karppa, Martin Aumüller, and Rasmus Pagh. 2022. Deann: Speeding up kernel-density estimation using approximate nearest neighbor search. In 

International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, 3108– 3137. [51] Fumiyuki Kato, Yang Cao, and Masatoshi Yoshikawa. 2023. Olive: Oblivious Federated Learning on Trusted Execution Environment Against the Risk of Sparsification. Proc. VLDB Endow. 16, 10 (2023), 2404–2417. doi:10.14778/36035 81.3603583 [52] Georgios Kellaris, George Kollios, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam O’Neill. 2016. Generic Attacks on Secure Outsourced Databases. In Proc. of the 23rd ACM CCS . 1329–1340. [53] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic opti-mization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014). [54] Nikita Kitaev, Łukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya. 2020. Reformer: The efficient transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04451 (2020). [55] Andreas Kogler, Jonas Juffinger, Lukas Giner, Lukas Gerlach, Martin Schwarzl, Michael Schwarz, Daniel Gruss, and Stefan Mangard. 2023. Collide+Power: Leaking Inaccessible Data with Software-based Power Side Channels. In 32nd USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 2023) . 7285–7302. [56] Evgenios M. Kornaropoulos, Charalampos Papamanthou, and Roberto Tamassia. 2019. Data Recovery on Encrypted Databases With 𝑘 -Nearest Neighbor Query Leakage. In Proc. of the 40th IEEE S&P .[57] Evgenios M. Kornaropoulos, Charalampos Papamanthou, and Roberto Tamassia. 2020. The State of the Uniform: Attacks on Encrypted Databases Beyond the Uniform Query Distribution. In Proc. of the 41th IEEE S&P .[58] Evgenios M. Kornaropoulos, Charalampos Papamanthou, and Roberto Tamassia. 2021. Response-Hiding Encrypted Ranges: Revisiting Security via Parametrized Leakage-Abuse Attacks. In Proc. of the 42nd IEEE S&P .[59] Dayeol Lee, Dongha Jung, Ian T Fang, Chia-Che Tsai, and Raluca Ada Popa. 2020. An {Off-Chip } attack on hardware enclaves via the memory bus. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20) .[60] Dayeol Lee, David Kohlbrenner, Shweta Shinde, Krste Asanović, and Dawn Song. 2020. Keystone: An open framework for architecting trusted execution environments. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth European Conference on Computer Systems . 1–16. [61] Sangho Lee, Ming-Wei Shih, Prasun Gera, Taesoo Kim, Hyesoon Kim, and Mar-cus Peinado. 2017. Inferring fine-grained control flow inside {SGX } enclaves with branch shadowing. In 26th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17) . 557–574. [62] Ding Li, Ziqi Zhang, Mengyu Yao, Yifeng Cai, Yao Guo, and Xiangqun Chen. 2025. Teeslice: Protecting sensitive neural network models in trusted execution environments when attackers have pre-trained models. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 34, 6 (2025), 1–49. [63] Ji Lin, Yongming Rao, Jiwen Lu, and Jie Zhou. 2017. Runtime neural pruning. 

Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). [64] Yehuda Lindell. 2017. How to simulate it–a tutorial on the simulation proof technique. Tutorials on the Foundations of Cryptography: Dedicated to Oded Goldreich (2017), 277–346. [65] Moritz Lipp, Andreas Kogler, David Oswald, Michael Schwarz, Catherine Eas-don, Claudio Canella, and Daniel Gruss. 2021. PLATYPUS: Software-based power side-channel attacks on x86. In 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 355–371. [66] Qin Lv, William Josephson, Zhe Wang, Moses Charikar, and Kai Li. 2007. Multi-probe LSH: efficient indexing for high-dimensional similarity search. In Pro-ceedings of the 33rd international conference on Very large data bases . 950–961. [67] Sinisa Matetic, Mansoor Ahmed, Kari Kostiainen, Aritra Dhar, David Sommer, Arthur Gervais, Ari Juels, and Srdjan Capkun. 2017. {ROTE }: Rollback protec-tion for trusted execution. In 26th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17) . 1289–1306. [68] Apostolos Mavrogiannakis, Xian Wang, Ioannis Demertzis, Dimitrios Pa-padopoulos, and Minos Garofalakis. 2025. {OBLIVIATOR }:{OBLIVIous } Par-allel Joins and other {OperATORs } in Shared Memory Environments. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) . 8521–8540. [69] Tharun Kumar Reddy Medini, Qixuan Huang, Yiqiu Wang, Vijai Mohan, and Anshumali Shrivastava. 2019. Extreme Classification in Log Memory using Count-Min Sketch: A Case Study of Amazon Search with 50M Products. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 13244–13254. [70] Nicholas Meisburger, Vihan Lakshman, Benito Geordie, Joshua Engels, David Torres Ramos, Pratik Pranav, Benjamin Coleman, Benjamin Meisburger, Shubh Gupta, Yashwanth Adunukota, et al . 2023. BOLT: An Automated Deep Learning Framework for Training and Deploying Large-Scale Search and Rec-ommendation Models on Commodity CPU Hardware. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management .4738–4744. [71] Pratyush Mishra, Rishabh Poddar, Jerry Chen, Alessandro Chiesa, and Raluca Ada Popa. 2018. Oblix: An efficient oblivious search index. In 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 279–296. [72] Sparsh Mittal, Poonam Rajput, and Sreenivas Subramoney. 2021. A survey of deep learning on CPUs: opportunities and co-optimizations. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 33, 10 (2021), 5095–5115. [73] Ahmad Moghimi, Gorka Irazoqui, and Thomas Eisenbarth. 2017. Cachezoom: How SGX amplifies the power of cache attacks. In Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems–CHES 2017: 19th International Conference, Taipei, Taiwan, September 25-28, 2017, Proceedings . Springer, 69–90. [74] Daniel Moghimi, Jo Van Bulck, Nadia Heninger, Frank Piessens, and Berk Sunar. 2020. {CopyCat }: Controlled {Instruction-Level } attacks on enclaves. In 29th USENIX security symposium (USENIX security 20) . 469–486. [75] Payman Mohassel and Peter Rindal. 2018. ABY3: A mixed protocol framework for machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security . 35–52. [76] Payman Mohassel and Yupeng Zhang. 2017. Secureml: A system for scalable privacy-preserving machine learning. In 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP) . IEEE, 19–38. [77] Deepak Narayanan, Amar Phanishayee, Kaiyu Shi, Xie Chen, and Matei Zaharia. 2021. Memory-Efficient Pipeline-Parallel DNN Training. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) . 7937–7947. [78] Maxim Naumov, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Hao-Jun Michael Shi, Jianyu Huang, Narayanan Sundaraman, Jongsoo Park, Xiaodong Wang, Udit Gupta, Carole-Jean Wu, Alisson G Azzolini, et al . 2019. Deep learning recommendation model for personalization and recommendation systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00091 (2019). [79] Lucien KL Ng, Sherman SM Chow, Anna PY Woo, Donald PH Wong, and Yongjun Zhao. 2021. Goten: Gpu-outsourcing trusted execution of neural network training. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,Vol. 35. 14876–14883. [80] Nicholas Ngai, Ioannis Demertzis, Javad Ghareh Chamani, and Dimitrios Pa-padopoulos. 2024. Distributed & scalable oblivious sorting and shuffling. In 

2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 4277–4295. [81] Yue Niu, Ramy E Ali, and Salman Avestimehr. 2021. 3legrace: Privacy-preserving dnn training over tees and gpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01229 (2021). [82] Olga Ohrimenko, Felix Schuster, Cédric Fournet, Aastha Mehta, Sebastian Nowozin, Kapil Vaswani, and Manuel Costa. 2016. Oblivious {Multi-Party }

machine learning on trusted processors. In 25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 16) . 619–636. [83] Sarvar Patel, Giuseppe Persiano, Mariana Raykova, and Kevin Yeo. 2018. PanORAMa: Oblivious RAM with logarithmic overhead. In 2018 IEEE 59th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) . IEEE, 871–882. [84] Sandro Pinto and Nuno Santos. 2019. Demystifying arm trustzone: A compre-hensive survey. ACM computing surveys (CSUR) 51, 6 (2019), 1–36. [85] Rachit Rajat, Yongqin Wang, and Murali Annavaram. 2023. LAORAM: A Look Ahead ORAM Architecture for Training Large Embedding Tables. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA 2023), Orlando, FL, USA, June 17-21, 2023 , Yan Solihin and Mark A. Heinrich (Eds.). ACM, 76:1–76:15. doi:10.1145/3579371.3589111 [86] Deevashwer Rathee, Mayank Rathee, Nishant Kumar, Nishanth Chandran, Divya Gupta, Aseem Rastogi, and Rahul Sharma. 2020. Cryptflow2: Practical 2-party secure inference. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 325–342. [87] Ling Ren, Xiangyao Yu, Christopher W Fletcher, Marten Van Dijk, and Srinivas Devadas. 2013. Design space exploration and optimization of path oblivious RAM in secure processors. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture . 571–582. [88] Sajin Sasy, Sergey Gorbunov, and Christopher W Fletcher. 2018. ZeroTrace: Oblivious Memory Primitives from Intel SGX. In 25th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2018 . The Internet Society. [89] Sajin Sasy, Aaron Johnson, and Ian Goldberg. 2022. Fast fully oblivious com-paction and shuffling. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 2565–2579. [90] Phillipp Schoppmann, Adrià Gascón, Mariana Raykova, and Benny Pinkas. 2019. Make some room for the zeros: Data sparsity in secure distributed machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security . 1335–1350. [91] Erik Schultheis and Rohit Babbar. 2023. Towards memory-efficient training for extremely large output spaces–learning with 670k labels on a single commodity gpu. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases . Springer, 689–704. [92] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. 2017. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538 (2017). [93] Ming-Wei Shih, Sangho Lee, Taesoo Kim, and Marcus Peinado. 2017. T-SGX: Eradicating Controlled-Channel Attacks Against Enclave Programs.. In NDSS ,Vol. 6. 15–43. [94] Shweta Shinde, Zheng Leong Chua, Viswesh Narayanan, and Prateek Saxena. 2016. Preventing page faults from telling your secrets. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 317–328. [95] Anshumali Shrivastava and Ping Li. 2014. Asymmetric LSH (ALSH) for sublinear time maximum inner product search (MIPS). Advances in neural information processing systems 27 (2014). [96] Chonghao Sima and Yexiang Xue. 2021. Lsh-smile: Locality sensitive hashing accelerated simulation and learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021), 7484–7496. [97] Ryan Spring and Anshumali Shrivastava. 2017. Scalable and sustainable deep learning via randomized hashing. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . 445–454. [98] Emil Stefanov, Marten van Dijk, Elaine Shi, T-H Hubert Chan, Christopher Fletcher, Ling Ren, Xiangyao Yu, and Srinivas Devadas. 2018. Path ORAM: an extremely simple oblivious RAM protocol. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 65, 4 (2018), 1–26. doi:10.1145/3177872 [99] Afonso Tinoco, Sixiang Gao, and Elaine Shi. 2023. EnigMap: External-Memory Oblivious Map for Secure Enclaves. In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23) . 4033–4050. [100] Florian Tramer and Dan Boneh. 2019. Slalom: Fast, Verifiable and Private Execution of Neural Networks in Trusted Hardware. In International Conference on Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJVorjCcKQ [101] Muhammad Umar, Akhilesh Parag Marathe, Monami Dutta Gupta, Shubham Jog-prakash Ghosh, G Edward Suh, and Wenjie Xiong. 2025. Efficient memory side-channel protection for embedding generation in machine learning. In 2025 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) .IEEE, 423–441. [102] Jo Van Bulck, Nico Weichbrodt, Rüdiger Kapitza, Frank Piessens, and Raoul Strackx. 2017. Telling your secrets without page faults: Stealthy page {Table-Based } attacks on enclaved execution. In 26th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17) . 1041–1056. [103] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). [104] Sameer Wagh, Divya Gupta, and Nishanth Chandran. 2019. SecureNN: 3-Party Secure Computation for Neural Network Training. Proc. Priv. Enhancing Technol. 

2019, 3 (2019), 26–49. [105] Sameer Wagh, Shruti Tople, Fabrice Benhamouda, Eyal Kushilevitz, Prateek Mittal, and Tal Rabin. 2021. Falcon: Honest-Majority Maliciously Secure Frame-work for Private Deep Learning. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 

1 (2021), 188–208. [106] Pengli Wang, Bingyou Dong, Yifeng Cai, Zheng Zhang, Junlin Liu, Huanran Xue, Ye Wu, Yao Zhang, and Ziqi Zhang. 2025. Game of Arrows: On the (In-)Security of Weight Obfuscation for On-Device TEE-Shielded LLM Partition Algorithms. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 2025), Seat-tle, WA, USA, August 13-15, 2025 , Lujo Bauer and Giancarlo Pellegrino (Eds.). USENIX Association, 279–298. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecu rity25/presentation/wang-pengli [107] Xiao Wang, Hubert Chan, and Elaine Shi. 2015. Circuit oram: On tightness of the goldreich-ostrovsky lower bound. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 850–861. [108] Xiao Shaun Wang, Kartik Nayak, Chang Liu, TH Hubert Chan, Elaine Shi, Emil Stefanov, and Yan Huang. 2014. Oblivious data structures. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security .215–226. [109] Yingchen Wang, Riccardo Paccagnella, Elizabeth Tang He, Hovav Shacham, Christopher W Fletcher, and David Kohlbrenner. 2022. Hertzbleed: Turning Power Side-Channel Attacks Into Remote Timing Attacks on x86. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 2022) . 679–697. [110] Luca Wilke, Florian Sieck, and Thomas Eisenbarth. 2024. TDXdown: Single-Stepping and Instruction Counting Attacks against Intel TDX. In Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS 2024) . 79–93. [111] Yuanzhong Xu, Weidong Cui, and Marcus Peinado. 2015. Controlled-channel attacks: Deterministic side channels for untrusted operating systems. In 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 640–656. [112] Jay Yagnik, Dennis Strelow, David A Ross, and Ruei-sung Lin. 2011. The power of comparative reasoning. In 2011 International Conference on Computer Vision .IEEE, 2431–2438. [113] Hsiang-Fu Yu, Kai Zhong, Jiong Zhang, Wei-Cheng Chang, and Inderjit S Dhillon. 2022. Pecos: Prediction for enormous and correlated output spaces. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research 23, 98 (2022), 1–32. [114] Ruiyi Zhang, Lukas Gerlach, Daniel Weber, Lorenz Hetterich, Youheng Lü, An-dreas Kogler, and Michael Schwarz. 2024. CacheWarp: Software-based Fault In-jection using Selective State Reset. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 2024) . 1135–1151. [115] Yupeng Zhang, Jonathan Katz, and Charalampos Papamanthou. 2016. All Your Queries Are Belong to Us: The Power of File-Injection Attacks on Searchable Encryption. In Proc. of the 25th USENIX Security . 707–720. [116] Leqian Zheng, Zheng Zhang, Wentao Dong, Yao Zhang, Ye Wu, and Cong Wang. 2025. H2O2RAM: A High-Performance Hierarchical Doubly Oblivious RAM. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 2025), Seattle, WA, USA, August 13-15, 2025 , Lujo Bauer and Giancarlo Pellegrino (Eds.). USENIX Association, 8501–8520. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity25 /presentation/zheng 

## A Generative AI Usage 

We used Claude (Anthropic) and ChatGPT (OpenAI) during the preparation of this paper. These tools assisted with rephrasing and grammar refinement in the manuscript, and with drafting portions of the implementation and plotting code. All AI-generated text and code were reviewed and verified by the authors before inclusion. The experimental results reported in this paper were produced by the authors on their own infrastructure. The authors take full re-sponsibility for the correctness of all claims, results, and references in this paper. 

## B Dataset and Preprocessing Details 

We use public multi-label classification benchmarks from the Ex-treme Classification Repository [ 11 ]. All datasets are provided as sparse bag-of-words features with integer label IDs, using the standard train.txt /test.txt split. Except for the Amazon-Sub dataset (synthetic), all others are available on the XC repository. 

Wiki10-31K (Wiki10). Wiki10-31K is a tag-prediction dataset constructed from Wikipedia pages, where each instance is rep-resented as a sparse bag-of-words vector and labeled with user-provided tags. We use the standard split with 14,146 training in-stances and 6,616 test instances, 30,938 labels, and 101,938 features. We use the repository-provided features and labels directly. 

Amazon-670K (Amz670). Amazon-670K is a product recom-mendation dataset with 670K labels. Each input corresponds to a product represented as a sparse feature vector, and labels denote other products that a user may be interested in purchasing. We use the standard split (490,449 train/153,025 test) with 670,091 labels and 135,909 features. 

WikiLSHTC-325K (Wiki325). WikiLSHTC-325K is extracted from Wikipedia, where each instance is a document represented us-ing sparse bag-of-words features and the label indicates its category. The benchmark contains 1,778,351 training instances and 587,084 test instances, with 325,056 labels and 1,617,899 features. We use the standard split and the repository-provided sparse representation. 

Amazon-Sub (Amz-Sub). To obtain a mid-scale benchmark that falls between Wiki10-31K and WikiLSHTC-325K while preserving the original feature space, we construct Amazon-sub from Amazon-670K using a strict label-budgeted subsetting procedure. We set the target training size and label budget as: 𝑁 target = multiplier · 14 ,146 

and 𝐿 target = multiplier · 30 ,938 , where multiplier ∈ { 2, 3} matches the scale of Wiki10-31K. For training, we enforce an ALL policy: selected training in-stances keep all of their labels (no partial deletion), and the union of labels is bounded by 𝐿 target . We use a two-phase cover-and-fill heuristic: Phase A greedily selects instances that introduce many new labels, biased toward frequent labels under the label budget; Phase B fills the remaining quota using only instances whose label sets are subsets of the kept label set (introducing no new labels). For testing, we enforce an ANY policy by keeping only instances with at least one kept label and dropping labels outside the kept label set. We then remap labels to a contiguous range. Optionally, we downsample the resulting test set to approximately one-third of the selected training set size, matching the train/test split used in Wiki10-31K and Amazon-670K. Our scripts output train.small.txt , test.small.txt , label_-map.json , kept_train_idx.txt , and stats.json , where stats.-json records the realized instance/label counts after subsetting. 

## C Additional Component Details C.1 MP-WTA 

Algorithm 3 ℎ2 WTA Hash   

> Input: vector

x ∈ R𝑑 , window size 𝑀 , # hash functions 𝐾   

> Output: WTA signature

h ∈ N𝐾 , second-choice signature h(2) ∈ N𝐾   

> 1: for

𝑖 ← 1 to 𝐾 do  

> 2:

𝑆 𝑖 ← the fixed sampled subset of size 𝑀 associated with the 𝑖 -th hash function 3: ℎ𝑖 ← index of the maximum among the elements of 𝑆 𝑖  

> 4:

ℎ2 

> 𝑖

← index of the second-maximum among the elements of 𝑆 𝑖   

> 5: return

(h, h(2) )

Algorithm 3 illustrates a high-level method for computing ℎ2 (·) 

WTA hash values. If multiple sampled features have the same value, ties are broken deterministically according to the fixed sampled order of that hash function. The computation of ℎ3 (·) is analogous, using the third-largest sampled feature. The WTA hash can be computed obliviously using comparison and assignment primitives (see Appendix D). 

## C.2 Neuron Fetcher 

Algorithm 4 details the Neuron Fetcher procedure outlined in Sec-tion 5.2.2. It takes the initialized ReqArray ℓ produced by Neuron Re-quester (Algorithm 2) and populates each entry’s Neuron-Buffer 

with the neurons stored in the corresponding LSH bucket. The algorithm is parameterized by a mode flag: in Read mode (feed-forward), neurons are transferred from the LSH table into the 

Neuron-Buffer s; in Write mode (backpropagation), the direction is reversed, writing updated neurons back to the LSH table. The procedure consists of three phases. 

Phase 1: OHT Construction (line 2). The 𝑇 = 𝐵 · lenSeq ℓ entries of 

ReqArray ℓ are transformed into an Oblivious Two-Tier Hash Table (OHT ) [ 19 ], keyed by LSHbucketID , via oblivious sorting (e.g., bitonic sort [ 8]). Since the OHT stores request records and resolves hash collisions through fixed-capacity bins, a single bin may contain entries for multiple distinct LSHbucketID s and may also contain multiple records with the same LSHbucketID . Additionally, each bin is padded with dummy entries (marked by an isDummy = 1 flag) to its public capacity binCap , ensuring that the bin occupancy does not leak information about the request distribution. 

Algorithm 4 Neuron Fetcher for layer ℓ  

> Input: Layer index

ℓ;

ReqArray ℓ of 𝑇 = 𝐵 · lenSeq ℓ entries, where: (i) in Read mode, it is the initialized array produced by Neuron Requester (Algorithm 2); and (ii) in Write    

> mode, it is the merged-and-updated array produced after OblMergeReqests
> (Algorithm 8) and the oblivious optimizer (Appendix C.5), with at most one non-dummy entry per LSHbucketID ;LSH table

LSH ℓ consisting of numLshBucs buckets, each padded to fixed capacity PADSIZE with dummy neurons; OHT tier-1 and tier-2 hash functions H1, H2 : {0, . . . , numLshBucs − 1} → {0, . . . , numBin − 1} [19], with fixed bin capacity binCap ;

mode ∈ { Read , Write }, where Read transfers neurons from LSH ℓ into      

> Neuron-Buffer (feedforward) and Write transfers in the reverse direction (back-propagation); oblivious primitives [ 32 ] (§D): OblCompare

(𝑎, 𝑏 ) (returns 1 iff 𝑎 = 𝑏 , data-obliviously) and OblChoose (flag , 𝑣 1, 𝑣 0 ) (obliviously returns 𝑣 1 if flag = 1, else 

𝑣 0, data-obliviously)  

> Output:

ReqArray ℓ with each entry’s Neuron-Buffer populated ( Read ) or LSH ℓ   

> updated with modified neurons ( Write )1: // Phase 1: Build OHT from Request-Array (key = LSHbucketID )
> 2:

OHT ← OHT.Build (ReqArray ℓ ) ⊲ oblivious construction via oblivious sorting [19] 3: // Phase 2: Linear scan of LSH table; In Write mode, this step assumes that ReqArray ℓ  

> has already been merged so that at most one non-dummy entry matches any given
> LSHbucketID ; otherwise multiple matching writes would overwrite one another.
> 4: for

𝑏 = 0 to numLshBucs − 1 do    

> // performs OHT.lookup [19]
> 5:

bin 1 ← H1 (𝑏 ); bin 2 ← H2 (𝑏 )  

> 6: for

tier ∈ { 1, 2} do    

> 7: for each entry

𝑒 in OHT .bins [bin tier ] do ⊲ iterate all binCap entries 8: if mode = Read then  

> 9:

match ← OblCompare (𝑒. LSHbucketID , 𝑏 ) 

> 10:

𝑒. Neuron-Buffer ←

> OblChoose

(match , LSH ℓ [𝑏 ], 𝑒. Neuron-Buffer )  

> 11: if

mode = Write then  

> 12:

matchW ← OblCompare (𝑒. LSHbucketID , 𝑏 )∧ (¬ 𝑒. isDummy ) 

> 13:

LSH ℓ [𝑏 ] ← 

> OblChoose

(matchW , 𝑒. Neuron-Buffer , LSH ℓ [𝑏 ] )    

> 14: // Phase 3: Extract populated entries from OHT back into Request-Array
> 15: Collect all entries from

OHT bins into a flat array 𝐴 , each entry carries an isDummy  

> flag. 16: OblSort

(𝐴 ) by key (isDummy , Batch-Rank ) ⊲ non-dummy entries first; dummy padding after them 17: ReqArray ℓ ← 𝐴 [0..𝑇 − 1] ⊲ restore fixed-length request array 18: return ReqArray ℓ , LSH ℓ

Phase 2: Linear Scan (lines 3–13). Neuron Fetcher linearly scans all numLshBucs buckets of LSH ℓ (line 4). For each bucket 𝑏 , it computes the two candidate OHT bins via the tier-1 and tier-2 hash functions H1 (𝑏 ) and H2 (𝑏 ) (line 5), then iterates over every entry in both bins (lines 6–7). In Read mode (lines 8–10): for each candidate entry 𝑒 , the oblivi-ous equality test OblCompare [ 32 ] checks whether 𝑒. LSHbucketID 

matches 𝑏 (line 9). The result drives OblChoose [ 32 ], an oblivious conditional select that returns one of two candidate values while al-ways executing the same fixed instruction structure. Then, a match updates 𝑒. Neuron-Buffer with LSH ℓ [𝑏 ] (line 10). In Write mode (lines 11–13), the scan tests the same bucket match and the non-dummy guard (line 12). A matching real entry updates LSH ℓ [𝑏 ] with its Neuron-Buffer (line 13). Because the outer loop visits every LSH bucket exactly once, the single-query requirement of the OHT [19] is satisfied. 

Phase 3: Request-Array Restoration (lines 14–18). After the scan, all 

OHT bin entries (real and dummy) are collected into a flat array and sorted by a single OblSort pass keyed on (isDummy , Batch-Rank ).This places non-dummy entries first, grouped by their originating input ( Batch-Rank ), while dummies are pushed to the tail. The first 

𝑇 positions constitute the restored fixed-length ReqArray ℓ , with dummy padding when Write mode has merged duplicate requests. In Write mode, the returned ReqArray ℓ is unused, but we return it uniformly to simplify the algorithm presentation. The ordering of requests within the same Batch-Rank may differ from the original 

ReqArray ℓ produced by Algorithm 2; this does not affect correct-ness, as the Neuron Updater (Section 5.2.3) processes all requests for a given input independently of their internal order. 

## C.3 Neuron Updater 

The Neuron Updater operates on the populated Request-Array 

for the LSH-selected layer and on a public-order dense array for layer 0. For each input 𝑖 ∈ [ 1..𝐵 ] and layer ℓ, it maintains two fixed-length arrays of public size 𝑅 ℓ : ActiveNodes [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 1..𝑅 ℓ ], which stores neuron IDs; and ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 1..𝑅 ℓ ], which stores the corresponding activation values. For LSH-selected layers, 𝑅 ℓ =

lenSeq ℓ · PADSIZE ; for dense layer 0, 𝑅 0 = 𝑁 0 and slots enumerate all dense neurons in public order. For LSH-selected layers, each slot 𝑟 maps to a unique, publicly determined location in ReqArray ℓ

via the helper SlotNode (Algorithm 5), so both feedforward and backpropagation traverse the same fixed slot layout. Dense layer 0 feedforward and optimizer updates scan the 𝑁 0 dense neurons in public order. 

Obliviousness Invariant. All updater routines consist of fixed-length scans over [1..𝑅 ℓ ] (or nested scans over [1..𝑅 ℓ+1] × [ 1..𝑅 ℓ ]), with loop bounds determined solely by public parameters such as 𝐵 ,

lenSeq ℓ , PADSIZE , and 𝑁 0. Dummy slots carry neutral values (zero weights, zero bias, zero activations) and are processed identically to real slots. Every data-dependent conditional is realized through branch-free oblivious primitives such as OblChoose and OblGt [32 ], so the updater reveals no private information beyond the public parameters in 𝑃 .

Algorithm 5 ( SlotNode ). This helper defines the canonical addressing rule for Request-Array . Recall that each input 𝑖 is al-located lenSeq ℓ consecutive entries in ReqArray ℓ , and each entry contains a Neuron-Buffer of PADSIZE neuron records. Given a linear slot index 𝑟 ∈ [1..𝑅 ℓ ], SlotNode deterministically com-putes a probe index 𝑡 = ⌊( 𝑟 −1)/ PADSIZE ⌋ and an in-buffer off-set 𝑠 = (𝑟 −1) mod PADSIZE (lines 1–2), then returns the neuron record at ReqArray ℓ [( 𝑖 −1)· lenSeq ℓ +𝑡 ].Neuron-Buffer [𝑠 ] (lines 3– 4). Because the entire mapping depends only on 𝑖 , 𝑟 , and public parameters, every subsequent access via SlotNode follows a fixed, input-independent pattern. 

Algorithm 5 SlotNode (ReqArray ℓ , 𝑖, 𝑟 )                                              

> Input: ReqArray ℓ[0..𝑇 −1], input index 𝑖 ∈ [ 1..𝐵 ], slot 𝑟 ∈ [ 1..𝑅 ℓ]
> Output: The neuron record stored at the public slot (𝑖, 𝑟 )
> 1: 𝑡 ← ⌊ ( 𝑟 −1)/ PADSIZE ⌋⊲probe index in [0.. lenSeq ℓ−1]
> 2: 𝑠 ← ( 𝑟 −1)mod PADSIZE ⊲slot index in buffer [0.. PADSIZE −1]
> 3: ind ← ( 𝑖 −1) · lenSeq ℓ+𝑡 ⊲public, deterministic index 4: return ReqArray ℓ[ind ].Neuron-Buffer [𝑠 ]

Algorithm 6 (Feed-Forward). This algorithm computes ac-tivations for all 𝐵 inputs at one layer: LSH-selected layers use 

Request-Array , while dense layer 0 uses a public-order scan over all 𝑁 0 neurons. For the output layer, it also performs softmax nor-malization. It proceeds in two passes per input. 

Algorithm 6 Neuron Updater – Feed-Forward at layer ℓ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

> Input: Layer index ℓ;activation type type ℓ∈ { ReLU ,Softmax }(public); populated ReqArray ℓfor LSH-selected layers; dense layer 0 is accessed as Layer 0.getNode (𝑟 )in public order; batch size 𝐵 ;
> 𝑅 ℓ=lenSeq ℓ·PADSIZE for LSH-selected layers, and 𝑅 0=𝑁 0for dense layer 0; previous-layer active-node IDs and values ActiveNodes [𝑖 ] [ ℓ−1] [ 1..𝑅 ℓ−1],
> ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ−1] [ 1..𝑅 ℓ−1]for each input 𝑖 (for ℓ=0, these are the raw input feature indices and values with 𝑅 ℓ−1set to input length);
> SlotNode (Algorithm 5); oblivious primitives [ 32 ] (§D): OblGt (𝑎, 𝑏 )(returns 1iff 𝑎 >𝑏 , data-obliviously) and OblChoose (flag , 𝑣 1, 𝑣 0)(returns 𝑣 1if flag =1, else 𝑣 0, data-obliviously)
> Output: ActiveNodes [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 1..𝑅 ℓ]and ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 1..𝑅 ℓ]for all 𝑖 ;for type ℓ=Softmax : normalization constants normConst [𝑖 ]and each neu-ron’s 𝑢. lastActivation [𝑖 ]written back 1: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 do
> 2: 𝑚 𝑖 ← −∞ ⊲for oblivious compare; used only if Softmax 3: // Pass 1: compute activations
> 4: for 𝑟 =1to 𝑅 ℓdo
> 5: 𝑢 ←Layer 0.getNode (𝑟 )if ℓ=0;otherwise 𝑢 ←
> SlotNode (ReqArray ℓ, 𝑖, 𝑟 )
> 6: 𝑎 ←𝑢. bias
> 7: for 𝑟 ′=1to 𝑅 ℓ−1do
> 8: 𝑎 ←𝑎 +𝑢. weights ActiveNodes [𝑖 ] [ ℓ−1] [ 𝑟 ′]·
> ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ−1] [ 𝑟 ′]
> 9: if type ℓ=ReLU then
> 10: 𝑎 ←OblChoose  OblGt (𝑎, 0), 𝑎, 0⊲ReLU 11: ActiveNodes [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 𝑟 ] ← 𝑢. ID
> 12: ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 𝑟 ] ← 𝑎
> 13: 𝑢. lastActivation [𝑖 ] ← 𝑎
> 14: if type ℓ=Softmax then
> 15: 𝑚 𝑖 ←OblChoose  OblGt (𝑎, 𝑚 𝑖 ), 𝑎, 𝑚 𝑖
> 
> 16: // Pass 2: softmax normalization (output layer only)
> 17: if type ℓ=Softmax then
> 18: normConst [𝑖 ] ← 0
> 19: for 𝑟 =1to 𝑅 ℓdo
> 20: 𝑢 ←SlotNode (ReqArray ℓ, 𝑖, 𝑟 )
> 21: 𝑧 ←exp  ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 𝑟 ] − 𝑚 𝑖
> 
> 22: 𝑧 ←OblChoose (𝑢. isDummy ,0, 𝑧 )⊲dummy slots contribute zero 23: ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 𝑟 ] ← 𝑧
> 24: 𝑢. lastActivation [𝑖 ] ← 𝑧
> 25: normConst [𝑖 ] ← normConst [𝑖 ] + 𝑧
> 26: normConst [𝑖 ] ←
> OblChoose  OblGt (normConst [𝑖 ],0),normConst [𝑖 ],1⊲guard against all-dummy batch 27: return ActiveNodes ,ActiveVals ,normConst

Scope: two-layer architecture. In TENNOR ’s two-layer architecture (Figure 1), only the output layer ( ℓ = 𝐿 −1) is wide and uses LSH-based neuron selection. Layer 0 is a dense hidden layer whose 𝑁 0

neurons are all accessed for every input. Therefore, lines 7–8 scan all 𝑁 0 neurons in layer 0. The corresponding weight access is im-plemented as a linear scan rather than a data-dependent lookup. Extending to multiple sparse layers would require additional obliv-ious indirection, such as a linear scan over 𝑢. weights , and is left to future work. In Pass 1 (lines 4–15), the algorithm scans all 𝑅 ℓ slots for in-put 𝑖 . At each slot 𝑟 , it retrieves the neuron record 𝑢 via SlotN-ode for LSH-selected layers, or via public-order layer 0 access for the dense layer (line 5), and computes the pre-activation as a weighted sum over the previous layer’s active state: 𝑎 = 𝑢. bias +

Í𝑅 ℓ −1  

> 𝑟 ′=1

𝑢. weights ActiveNodes [𝑖 ] [ ℓ − 1] [ 𝑟 ′] · ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ −

1] [ 𝑟 ′] (lines 6–8). For ℓ = 0 (the first hidden layer), the previous-layer arrays are replaced by the raw input feature indices and val-ues. If the layer uses ReLU activation, the pre-activation is clamped to zero via an oblivious conditional (lines 9–10). The resulting neuron ID and activation are recorded into ActiveNodes [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 𝑟 ]

and ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 𝑟 ] (lines 11–13). For the Softmax output layer, a running oblivious maximum 𝑚 𝑖 is maintained via OblGt and 

OblChoose over all slot activations (lines 14–15). 

Pass 2 (lines 16–26) executes only for the output layer ( type ℓ =

Softmax ). Using the oblivious maximum 𝑚 𝑖 from Pass 1, the algo-rithm re-scans all 𝑅 ℓ slots and computes numerically stable expo-nentials 𝑧 = exp (ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ] [ 𝑟 ] − 𝑚 𝑖 ) (line 21). Dummy slots are then explicitly zeroed via 𝑧 ← OblChoose (𝑢. isDummy , 0, 𝑧 )

(line 22), ensuring that padding neurons contribute exactly zero to the normalization constant rather than a data-dependent resid-ual. Each slot’s activation is replaced in place by 𝑧 (lines 23–24), and the normalization constant normConst [𝑖 ] accumulates the sum of these exponentials (line 25). The actual softmax probabil-ity 𝑝 = 𝑧 /normConst [𝑖 ] is deferred to the backpropagation stage (Algorithm 7), where it is computed immediately before the output-layer delta calculation. A guard ensures normConst [𝑖 ] ≥ 1 via 

OblChoose , so that an all-dummy batch (where all exponentials are zeroed) yields 𝑝 = 0 rather than a division by zero (line 26). Both passes consist of fixed-length scans whose bounds are de-termined by public parameters. In Pass 1, dummy slots contribute zero to the weighted sum due to their zero weights and activa-tions. In Pass 2, dummy slots are explicitly zeroed (line 22), so they contribute exactly zero to normConst [𝑖 ] and propagate zero delta throughout backpropagation. All data-dependent choices (ReLU clamping, oblivious maximum, dummy zeroing) use branch-free primitives. Hence, the feedforward pass reveals no private informa-tion beyond the public parameters (including the public sparsity pattern). 

Algorithm 7 (Backpropagation). This algorithm computes gradient accumulators for the LSH-selected layer’s Request-Array 

and for dense layer 0. It proceeds in three phases, mirroring standard backpropagation over the fixed LSH-selected slot layout and the public-order dense layer 0 array. 

Scope: two-layer architecture. In TENNOR ’s two-layer architecture (Figure 1), only the output layer ( ℓ = 𝐿 −1) is wide and uses LSH-based neuron selection. Layer 0 is a dense hidden layer whose 𝑁 0

neurons are all accessed for every input. This design is critical for obliviousness of the Neuron Updater: the backpropagation loop always follows lines 26–32 rather than the sparse-layer branch in lines 19–25. In the inner loop of Phase 2 (lines 26–32), the weight access 𝑢. weights [𝑣. ID ] iterates over all 𝑁 0 neurons of the dense layer 0, so the access pattern is independent of the input data. If the network has more than two layers and multiple layers use LSH, then the sparse-layer branch in lines 19–25 can make 𝑣. ID 

depend on which neurons were selected for each input, making the weight access pattern data-dependent. Extending TENNOR to support additional sparse layers would require an oblivious indirection mechanism (e.g., an additional linear scan per weight access) and is left to future work. We emphasize, however, that the output layer, which is responsible for an extremely large number of labels, dominates the computational cost. Therefore, the cost of additional oblivious operations for multiple-layer extension is manageable. 

Phase 1: Output-layer deltas (lines 1–11). For each input 𝑖 and slot 

𝑟 at the output layer ℓ = 𝐿 − 1, the algorithm retrieves the neuron record 𝑢 and computes its softmax probability 𝑝 (line 6). Here 

𝑝 = 𝑢. lastActivation [𝑖 ]/ normConst [𝑖 ], where 𝑢. lastActivation [𝑖 ]

holds the exponential computed during feedforward Pass 2. The algorithm then determines whether 𝑢 corresponds to a ground-truth label in 𝑌 𝑖 via an oblivious scan over 𝑌 𝑖 using OblCompare (lines 9– 10). The output delta is set to (1/| 𝑌 𝑖 | − 𝑝 )/ 𝐵 for positive labels and −𝑝 /𝐵 for negative labels, selected obliviously via OblChoose 

(line 11). Note that |𝑌 𝑖 | is a public parameter in the multi-label classification setting. For dummy slots, since their exponential was explicitly zeroed during feedforward (Algorithm 6, line 22), we have 

𝑝 = 0. This yields a delta of 0 because the dummy ID matches no label, so dummy slots contribute zero in all subsequent phases. 

Phase 2: Layer-by-layer propagation (lines 12–35). For each layer 

ℓ from 𝐿 −1 down to 1, and for each input 𝑖 , the algorithm scans all 

𝑅 ℓ slots of layer ℓ. For each neuron 𝑢 in layer ℓ with accumulated delta 𝛿 𝑢 = 𝑢. delta [𝑖 ] (line 18), a nested loop over all 𝑅 ℓ −1 slots of the previous layer performs two operations per pair (𝑢, 𝑣 ):

(1) Delta propagation (lines 22–25): the error signal is added to 𝑣. delta [𝑖 ], gated by the ReLU derivative of 𝑣 . The signal is 𝛿 𝑢 

times the weight from 𝑣 to 𝑢 . The increment is applied only if 

𝑣. lastActivation [𝑖 ] > 0, i.e., the neuron was not killed by ReLU during feedforward. This condition is checked via OblGt and writ-ten via OblChoose . For dummy neurons, whose activation is zero, 

OblGt (0, 0) returns 0, so no delta is propagated into dummy slots. 

(2) Weight gradient accumulation (line 26): the gradient for the edge from 𝑣 to 𝑢 is 𝛿 𝑢 · 𝑣. lastActivation [𝑖 ] and is accumulated into 

𝑢. t[𝑣. ID ]. Since killed or dummy neurons have lastActivation = 0,their contribution is automatically zero. After the inner loop completes, the bias gradient 𝛿 𝑢 is accumu-lated into 𝑢. tbias exactly once per (𝑢, 𝑖 ) pair (line 35). This place-ment is critical: accumulating the bias gradient inside the inner loop would multiply it by 𝑅 ℓ −1, the number of slots in the previous layer. Recall that in our two-layer architecture, Phase 2 executes only for ℓ = 1, so the inner loop always iterates over the 𝑁 0 neurons of the dense layer 0. The sparse-layer branch (lines 20–26) is included for generality. When ℓ = 1, the previous layer (layer 0) is a dense layer that does not use Request-Array . In this case, the inner loop iterates over all 𝑁 0 neurons of layer 0 directly rather than through SlotNode .

Phase 3: First-layer gradients (lines 36–43). For each input 𝑖 , the algorithm iterates over all 𝑁 0 neurons of layer 0. Each neuron 𝑣 

accumulates weight gradients from the input features of x𝑖 : for each feature (𝑑, 𝑥 𝑑 ), the gradient 𝛿 𝑣 · 𝑥 𝑑 is added to 𝑣. t[𝑑 ] (line 42). The bias gradient 𝛿 𝑣 is accumulated once per (𝑣, 𝑖 ) pair (line 43). 

Remark on first-layer sparsity. In Phase 3, the gradient update 

𝑣. t[𝑑 𝑗 ] + = 𝛿 𝑣 · 𝑥 𝑑 𝑗 accesses weight dimension 𝑑 𝑗 , which depends on the sparsity pattern of the input x𝑖 . Consequently, the adversary can learn the set of non-zero feature indices of each training input, but not the corresponding feature values, weights, gradients, or any other intermediate quantities. Fully hiding the sparsity pattern Algorithm 7 Neuron Updater – Backpropagation 

Input: ReqArray ℓ for each LSH-selected layer ℓ; dense layer 0 is stored as a public-order array of 𝑁 0 neurons; 

ActiveVals [𝑖 ] [ ℓ ] [ 1..𝑅 ℓ ] and normConst [𝑖 ] from feedforward (Algorithm 6); number of layers 𝐿 , batch size 𝐵 ;

𝑅 ℓ = lenSeq ℓ · PADSIZE for each LSH-selected layer ℓ, and 𝑅 0 = 𝑁 0 for dense layer 0; labels 𝑌 𝑖 ⊆ [ 0..𝐶 − 1] with sizes |𝑌 𝑖 | for each input 𝑖 in a batch; dummy neuron IDs are public sentinel values outside [0..𝐶 − 1];

𝑁 0: number of neurons in layer 0 (size of each layer, publicly known); sparse training inputs x𝑖 , each containing nnz non-zero features out of 𝐷 total dimensions, represented as (index, value) pairs (𝑑 𝑗 , 𝑥 𝑑 𝑗 ) for 𝑗 ∈ [ 1.. nnz ]; both nnz and the non-zero indices {𝑑 1, . . . , 𝑑 nnz } are public, while the feature values 𝑥 𝑑 𝑗 are private; 

SlotNode (Algorithm 5); oblivious primitives [32] (§D): OblCompare (𝑎, 𝑏 ) (returns 1 iff 𝑎 = 𝑏 ), OblGt (𝑎, 𝑏 ) (returns 1 iff 𝑎 > 𝑏 ), OblChoose (flag , 𝑣 1, 𝑣 0 ) (returns 𝑣 1 if flag = 1, else 𝑣 0)

Output: Per-neuron gradient accumulators updated for all neurons in each LSH-selected ReqArray ℓ and in dense layer 0 1: // Phase 1: Output-layer delta computation 

2: ℓ ← 𝐿 − 1

3: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝐵 do 

4: for 𝑟 = 1 to 𝑅 ℓ do 

5: 𝑢 ← SlotNode (ReqArray ℓ , 𝑖, 𝑟 )

6: 𝑝 ← 𝑢. lastActivation [𝑖 ] / normConst [𝑖 ] ⊲ softmax probability 7: 𝑢. lastActivation [𝑖 ] ← 𝑝 

8: isLabel ← 0

9: for each 𝑦 ∈ 𝑌 𝑖 do 

10: isLabel ← OblChoose  OblCompare (𝑦, 𝑢. ID ), 1, isLabel 

11: 𝑢. delta [𝑖 ] ← OblChoose  isLabel , (1/| 𝑌 𝑖 | − 𝑝 )/ 𝐵, −𝑝 /𝐵 

12: Reset dense-layer delta scratch state by a fixed public scan over [1..𝐵 ] × [ 1..𝑁 0 ]

13: // Phase 2: Layer-by-layer propagation and gradient accumulation 

14: for ℓ = 𝐿 −1 down to 1 do 

15: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝐵 do 

16: for 𝑟 𝑢 = 1 to 𝑅 ℓ do 

17: 𝑢 ← SlotNode (ReqArray ℓ , 𝑖, 𝑟 𝑢 )

18: 𝛿 𝑢 ← 𝑢. delta [𝑖 ]

19: // Inner loop: propagate delta to layer ℓ −1 and accumulate weight gradients 

20: if ℓ > 1 then 

21: for 𝑟 𝑣 = 1 to 𝑅 ℓ −1 do ⊲ iterate active neurons in sparse layer 22: 𝑣 ← SlotNode (ReqArray ℓ −1, 𝑖, 𝑟 𝑣 )

23: inc ← 𝛿 𝑢 · 𝑢. weights [𝑣. ID ]

24: isAct ← OblGt  𝑣. lastActivation [𝑖 ], 0

25: 𝑣. delta [𝑖 ] ← OblChoose  isAct , 𝑣. delta [𝑖 ] + inc , 𝑣. delta [𝑖 ]

26: 𝑢. t[𝑣. ID ] ← 𝑢. t[𝑣. ID ] + 𝛿 𝑢 · 𝑣. lastActivation [𝑖 ]

27: else 

28: for 𝑛 = 1 to 𝑁 0 do ⊲ iterate dense layer 29: 𝑣 ← Layer 0 .getNode (𝑛 )

30: inc ← 𝛿 𝑢 · 𝑢. weights [𝑣. ID ]

31: isAct ← OblGt  𝑣. lastActivation [𝑖 ], 0

32: 𝑣. delta [𝑖 ] ← OblChoose  isAct , 𝑣. delta [𝑖 ] + inc , 𝑣. delta [𝑖 ]

33: 𝑢. t[𝑣. ID ] ← 𝑢. t[𝑣. ID ] + 𝛿 𝑢 · 𝑣. lastActivation [𝑖 ]

34: // Bias gradient: once per (𝑢, 𝑖 ), outside the inner loop 

35: 𝑢. tbias ← 𝑢. tbias + 𝛿 𝑢 

36: // Phase 3: First-layer gradient from input features 

37: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝐵 do 

38: for 𝑛 = 1 to 𝑁 0 do 

39: 𝑣 ← Layer 0 .getNode (𝑛 )

40: 𝛿 𝑣 ← 𝑣. delta [𝑖 ]

41: for 𝑗 = 1 to nnz do 

⊲ (𝑑 𝑗 , 𝑥 𝑑 𝑗 ): index and value of the 𝑗 -th non-zero feature of x𝑖 

42: 𝑣. t[𝑑 𝑗 ] ← 𝑣. t[𝑑 𝑗 ] + 𝛿 𝑣 · 𝑥 𝑑 𝑗 

43: 𝑣. tbias ← 𝑣. tbias + 𝛿 𝑣 

is possible (e.g., via an oblivious scatter based on oblivious sorting) but incurs 𝑂 (𝑁 0 · 𝐷 log 𝐷 ) cost per batch, where 𝐷 is the input dimensionality. For high-dimensional sparse datasets this overhead dominates the training cost; we therefore treat the sparsity pattern as public information (see §E) and leave a more efficient oblivious treatment to future work. 

Obliviousness. In Phase 1, the scan over 𝑅 ℓ slots and the label-matching loop over |𝑌 𝑖 | both have publicly determined bounds; 

|𝑌 𝑖 | is a public parameter in the multi-label setting. In Phase 2, the nested loop bounds 𝑅 ℓ ×𝑅 ℓ −1 depend only on public parameters, and every slot pair executes the same sequence of OblGt , OblChoose ,and arithmetic operations regardless of match outcome. Phase 3 op-erates on the dense layer 0; the outer loop over 𝑁 0 neurons and the Algorithm 8 OblMergeReqests (ReqArray ℓ )                                                                                            

> Input: ReqArray ℓ[0..𝑇 −1]with 𝑇 =𝐵 ·lenSeq ℓ, where each entry stores
> LSHbucketID ,isDummy flag, and a Neuron-Buffer [0.. PADSIZE −1];
> 𝐷 ℓ: weight dimension at layer ℓ;each neuron record carries gradient accumulators 𝑢. t[0..𝐷 ℓ−1]and 𝑢. tbias
> populated by backpropagation (Algorithm 7); oblivious primitives [32 ]: OblCompare (𝑎, 𝑏 ),OblChoose (flag , 𝑣 1, 𝑣 0);
> OblSort (oblivious sorting, e.g., bitonic sort [8])
> Output: Merged ReqArray ℓwith at most one non-dummy entry per LSHbucketID ;for each surviving entry, the gradient accumulators in every Neuron-Buffer slot equal the slot-wise sum over all original copies of that LSH bucket
> // group request entries that reference the same LSH bucket
> 1: OblSort (ReqArray ℓ,key =LSHbucketID )
> 2: for 𝑗 =𝑇 −1down to 1do
> 3: same ←
> OblCompare (ReqArray ℓ[𝑗 ].LSHbucketID ,ReqArray ℓ[𝑗 −1].LSHbucketID )
> // slot-wise fold of gradient state from copy 𝑗 into aligned copy 𝑗 −1
> 4: FoldIntoPrev (same ,ReqArray ℓ[𝑗 ],ReqArray ℓ[𝑗 −1])5: MarkDummy (same ,ReqArray ℓ[𝑗 ])⊲set isDummy ←1if same
> 6: OblSort (ReqArray ℓ,key =isDummy )⊲push dummies to end; array length unchanged 7: return ReqArray ℓ

inner loop over nnz non-zero features both have publicly known bounds. The gradient accumulators reside within the correspond-ing Request-Array records for the LSH-selected layer and dense layer 0 records for first-layer gradients, and are written at locations determined by public loop indices and the public sparsity pattern. Hence, the backpropagation pass reveals no private information beyond the public sparsity pattern included in 𝑃 .

Oblivious Optimizer After backpropagation completes, the gradient accumulators 𝑢. t[·] and 𝑢. tbias are distributed across mul-tiple request entries in ReqArray ℓ that may reference the same LSH bucket. Each such entry stores a copy of that bucket in its 

Neuron-Buffer , so entries with the same LSHbucketID contain slot-aligned copies of the same padded neuron set. These copies are first consolidated by OblMergeReqests (Appendix C.4), which obliviously groups entries by LSHbucketID and folds their gradi-ent state slot-by-slot into a single surviving representative. The merged accumulators are then consumed by the oblivious optimizer (Appendix C.5), which applies the Adam optimizer to each neuron before write-back to the LSH table. 

## C.4 Oblivious Neuron Merge 

After backpropagation (Algorithm 7), multiple entries in ReqArray ℓ

may share the same LSHbucketID . Such entries correspond to dif-ferent requests (inputs) for the same LSH bucket and therefore contain slot-aligned copies of the same padded neuron set in their 

Neuron-Buffer s. Each copy carries gradient accumulators ( 𝑢. t[·] 

and 𝑢. tbias ) contributed by its respective input. Before the parame-ter update (Appendix C.5) and write-back to the LSH table, these bucket copies must be consolidated so that, for each slot position in the Neuron-Buffer , the surviving copy holds the sum of all per-input gradients associated with the neuron stored in that slot. Algorithm 8 performs this consolidation in three steps. First, an oblivious sort (e.g., bitonic sort [ 8 ]) groups request entries by 

LSHbucketID (line 1), making all request entries for the same bucket contiguous. This step does not sort by neuron ID. Second, a backward linear scan from 𝑗 = 𝑇 − 1 down to 1

(lines 2–5) processes each pair of adjacent entries. For each 𝑗 ,

OblCompare [32 ] tests whether entries 𝑗 and 𝑗 − 1 share the same 

LSHbucketID (line 3). If so, FoldIntoPrev obliviously accumu-lates the gradient state of entry 𝑗 into entry 𝑗 − 1 slot-by-slot: for each neuron slot 𝑠 ∈ [ 0.. PADSIZE −1] and each weight dimen-sion 𝑑 ∈ [ 0..𝐷 ℓ −1], it adds ReqArray ℓ [ 𝑗 ].Neuron-Buffer [𝑠 ].t[𝑑 ]

into the corresponding field of entry 𝑗 −1, and likewise for tbias 

(line 4). This slot-wise fold is correct because entries with the same 

LSHbucketID contain aligned copies of the same bucket, so the same neuron appears in the same slot across those copies. The donor entry 𝑗 is then marked as dummy via MarkDummy (line 5). Both FoldIntoPrev and MarkDummy use OblChoose to ensure branch-free execution regardless of the match outcome. Because the scan proceeds backward, gradients from a group of 𝑘 entries with the same LSHbucketID are successively folded into the first entry of the group, which retains the complete aggregated gradient state for that bucket copy. Third, a final oblivious sort by isDummy (line 6) pushes all marked-dummy entries to the end while keeping the array length 𝑇 un-changed, producing a compact prefix of unique bucket entries fol-lowed by dummy padding. 

Obliviousness. All three steps operate on fixed-length arrays with publicly determined sizes. The two oblivious sorts and the linear scan each produce access patterns that depend only on 𝑇 . All conditional operations within the scan ( OblCompare , OblChoose 

inside FoldIntoPrev and MarkDummy ) are branch-free. Hence, the merge reveals nothing beyond public parameters. 

## C.5 Oblivious Optimizer 

Algorithm 9 (Adam Update). After gradient accumulation (Algo-rithm 7) and oblivious merge (Algorithm 8), each neuron record in 

ReqArray ℓ holds a single consolidated gradient in 𝑢. t[·] and 𝑢. tbias ,aggregated across all inputs in the batch that requested that neu-ron. Algorithm 9 applies the Adam optimizer [ 53 ] to update every neuron’s weights and bias before write-back to the LSH table. For dense layer 0, the same Adam rule is applied by a separate fixed public-order scan over all 𝑁 0 dense neurons. This consumes the layer-0 gradients accumulated in Phase 3 of Algorithm 7. The algorithm first computes a bias-corrected learning rate ˜𝛼 =

𝛼 ·√︃ 1 − 𝛽 step  

> 2

/ ( 1 − 𝛽 step  

> 1

) (line 1), absorbing the standard Adam bias-correction terms into the learning rate rather than correcting the moment estimates directly. This is mathematically equivalent to the standard formulation [ 53 ] and avoids two additional divisions per weight per neuron. The main body (lines 2–15) performs a flat linear scan over all 

𝑇 ·PADSIZE neuron slots in ReqArray ℓ . For each neuron 𝑢 , it iterates over all 𝐷 ℓ weight dimensions: the first-moment estimate 𝑢. m[𝑑 ]

is updated with the gradient 𝑢. t[𝑑 ] (line 6), the second-moment estimate 𝑢. v[𝑑 ] is updated with the squared gradient (line 7), and the weight is adjusted accordingly (line 8). The gradient accumulator 

𝑢. t[𝑑 ] is then reset to zero (line 9) in preparation for the next batch. The same update is applied to the bias terms 𝑢. mBias , 𝑢. vBias , and 

𝑢. bias (lines 11–14). For dummy neurons, the gradient accumulators 𝑢. t[·] and 𝑢. tbias 

are zero throughout training (as established in the backpropagation analysis). Consequently, the moment estimates remain at their initialized values of zero, and the weight update ˜𝛼 · 0/( 0 + 𝜖 ) =0 leaves dummy weights unchanged. Dummy neurons are thus processed identically to real neurons without branching. 

Obliviousness. The loop bounds 𝑇 , PADSIZE , and 𝐷 ℓ are all public parameters. Every neuron slot executes the identical se-quence of arithmetic operations regardless of whether it is real or dummy. The bias-corrected learning rate ˜𝛼 depends only on the public training step step and public hyperparameters. Hence, the Adam update follows an input-independent access pattern. 

Algorithm 9 Adam Update for layer ℓ  

> Input: Merged

ReqArray ℓ [0..𝑇 − 1] from OblMergeReqests (Algorithm 8), where 

𝑇 = 𝐵 · lenSeq ℓ ;each entry contains a Neuron-Buffer of PADSIZE neuron records; 

𝐷 ℓ : weight dimension at layer ℓ;each neuron record 𝑢 stores: weights 𝑢. weights [0..𝐷 ℓ −1], bias 𝑢. bias ,first-moment estimates 𝑢. m[0..𝐷 ℓ − 1] and 𝑢. mBias , second-moment estimates 

𝑢. v[0..𝐷 ℓ −1] and 𝑢. vBias , and gradient accumulators 𝑢. t[0..𝐷 ℓ −1] and 𝑢. tbias  

> populated by backpropagation (Algorithm 7) and merge; hyperparameters: base learning rate

𝛼 , decay rates 𝛽 1, 𝛽 2, stability constant 

𝜖 ; global training step step (public)   

> Output: All neuron weights and biases updated; moment estimates updated; gradient accumulators reset to zero 1:

˜𝛼 ← 𝛼 ·√︃ 1 − 𝛽 step  

> 2

/ ( 1 − 𝛽 step  

> 1

) ⊲ bias-corrected learning rate 2: for 𝑘 = 0 to 𝑇 − 1 do   

> 3: for

𝑠 = 0 to PADSIZE − 1 do  

> 4:

𝑢 ← ReqArray ℓ [𝑘 ].Neuron-Buffer [𝑠 ]   

> 5: // Update weights
> 6: for

𝑑 = 0 to 𝐷 ℓ − 1 do  

> 7:

𝑢. m[𝑑 ] ← 𝛽 1 · 𝑢. m[𝑑 ] + ( 1 − 𝛽 1 ) · 𝑢. t[𝑑 ] 

> 8:

𝑢. v[𝑑 ] ← 𝛽 2 · 𝑢. v[𝑑 ] + ( 1 − 𝛽 2 ) · 𝑢. t[𝑑 ] 2 

> 9:

𝑢. weights [𝑑 ] ← 𝑢. weights [𝑑 ] + ˜𝛼 · 𝑢. m[𝑑 ] / ( √︁ 𝑢. v[𝑑 ] + 𝜖 ) 

> 10:

𝑢. t[𝑑 ] ← 0 ⊲ reset gradient accumulator 11: // Update bias  

> 12:

𝑢. mBias ← 𝛽 1 · 𝑢. mBias + ( 1 − 𝛽 1 ) · 𝑢. tbias  

> 13:

𝑢. vBias ← 𝛽 2 · 𝑢. vBias + ( 1 − 𝛽 2 ) · 𝑢. tbias 2 

> 14:

𝑢. bias ← 𝑢. bias + ˜𝛼 · 𝑢. mBias / ( √𝑢. vBias + 𝜖 ) 

> 15:

𝑢. tbias ← 0 ⊲ reset gradient accumulator 

## C.6 Oblivious LSH Refresh 

The LSH table maps each neuron to an LSH bucket determined by its WTA hash signature. As neuron weights change during training, these signatures may shift, so the table must be periodically refreshed to maintain hash consistency. Algorithm 10 describes the oblivious refresh procedure. The refresh operates on a flat array 𝐴 that contains all entries currently stored in LSHTable ℓ . During initialization ( isInit = 1), the algorithm first flattens the initial real-neuron records into 𝐴 

and then appends PADSIZE dummies per bucket, each with a pub-lic target bucket label (lines 1–3). The subsequent sort relocates both dummy and real entries to their target buckets. In subsequent refreshes, 𝐴 already contains the full padded table (including the overflow area described below), so no new dummies are added. The procedure has four steps. First, every entry in 𝐴 receives a fresh bucket assignment newID by recomputing its WTA hash (lines 4–6). Second, an oblivious sort groups entries by bucket and dummy flag, placing real entries before dummies within each bucket (line 7). Third, EnforceCapacity (Algorithm 11) marks every entry beyond position PADSIZE within its bucket as overflow (line 8). Fourth, a second oblivious sort packs all non-overflow entries before overflow entries while preserving bucket order (line 9). The main prefix of 𝐴 is written back to LSHTable ℓ ; the remaining positions form the overflow area (line 10–11). 

Overflow area. After rehashing, buckets may receive fewer than, exactly, or more than PADSIZE real neurons. The dummy reservoir fills unused main-region slots, and any excess entries are stored in a dedicated overflow area appended to LSHTable ℓ .The main proof theorem covers executions in which PADSIZE is chosen so that no real neuron overflows its assigned bucket during initialization or refresh. Under this condition, the overflow area contains only dummy entries. If real neurons overflow, the overflow behavior and its effect on training must be modeled separately in the security proof. This design ensures that the size of 𝐴 and the number of en-tries written back are both fixed and publicly determined, so the refresh procedure’s memory-access pattern reveals no information about the distribution of neurons across buckets. PADSIZE is cho-sen conservatively based on the dataset, and any dataset-dependent selection rule is treated as public. 

Obliviousness. The WTA hash computation (line 5) processes every entry identically. Both oblivious sorts (lines 7 and 9) de-pend only on the public array length |𝐴 |. EnforceCapacity (Algo-rithm 11) performs a single linear scan over 𝐴 using branch-free primitives ( OblCompare , OblChoose , OblGt ), with access pattern determined solely by |𝐴 |. The final write-back copies the main pre-fix and overflow suffix to fixed regions. Hence, the entire refresh procedure follows an input-independent access pattern. 

Algorithm 10 OblRefreshLSH (LSHTable ℓ )  

> Input: LSH table state

LSHTable ℓ with a main region of numLshBucs buckets, each of fixed capacity PADSIZE , and a public-size overflow region; an initialization flag isInit ∈ { 0, 1}, where isInit = 1 iff this is the initial construction of LSHTable ℓ ;WTA hash functions ℎ1, . . . , ℎ 𝐾 for layer ℓ;oblivious primitives [ 32 ]: OblCompare (𝑎, 𝑏 ), OblChoose (flag , 𝑣 1, 𝑣 0 );   

> OblSort (oblivious sorting, e.g., bitonic sort [8])
> Output: Refreshed

LSHTable ℓ with updated main and overflow regions // A contains all entries in the main region plus the overflow region 1: A ← flatten all entries from the main and overflow regions of LSHTable ℓ  

> 2: if

isInit = 1 then ⊲ add dummies only during initialization 3: Append numLshBucs × PADSIZE fresh dummies to A, with PADSIZE dum-mies per public target bucket 4: for 𝑗 = 0 to |A| − 1 do  

> 5:

candID ← WTA (A[ 𝑗 ] )  

> 6:

A[ 𝑗 ].newID ← OblChoose (A[ 𝑗 ].isDummy , A[ 𝑗 ].targetID , candID ) ⊲ 

> real entries use WTA; dummies keep public targets 7: OblSort

(A, key = (newID , isDummy ) ) ⊲ group by bucket; reals before dummies 8: EnforceCapacity (A, PADSIZE ) ⊲ linear scan; mark entries beyond PADSIZE   

> per bucket as isOverflow
> 9: OblSort

(A, key = (isOverflow , newID ) ) ⊲ pack valid entries before the overflow area 10: Write A[0.. numLshBucs × PADSIZE − 1] back to LSHTable ℓ sequentially 11: Write the remaining entries of A back to the overflow region sequentially 

EnforceCapacity (Algorithm 11). After the first oblivious sort groups entries by newID with real entries preceding dummies within each bucket, EnforceCapacity performs a single linear scan to detect overflow. It maintains a bucket-local position counter over all entries seen in the current bucket; when a new bucket is encoun-tered, the counter resets to zero via OblChoose . Any entry whose bucket-local position exceeds PADSIZE is flagged isOverflow = 1; all other entries retain isOverflow = 0 . Because real entries precede dummies, the theorem’s no-real-overflow condition im-plies that all overflow entries in the covered executions are dummy entries. The scan touches every position in 𝐴 exactly once with branch-free primitives ( OblCompare , OblChoose , OblGt ), so the ac-cess pattern depends only on |𝐴 |, which is a public parameter. Over-flow entries are stored in a dedicated region at the tail of LSHTable ℓ

and are excluded from the current training iteration. They are re-assigned to valid bucket positions during the next invocation of 

OblRefreshLSH . PADSIZE is chosen conservatively based on the dataset. 

Algorithm 11 EnforceCapacity (𝐴, PADSIZE )                                                        

> Input: Array 𝐴 sorted by (newID ,isDummy )(real entries before dummies within each bucket); bucket capacity PADSIZE
> Output: Each bucket retains at most PADSIZE entries; excess real and dummy entries are marked isOverflow
> 1: curBucket ←𝐴 [0].newID
> 2: count ←0
> 3: for 𝑗 =0to |𝐴 | − 1do
> 4: bucketChanged ← ¬ OblCompare (𝐴 [𝑗 ].newID ,curBucket )
> 5: count ←OblChoose (bucketChanged ,0,count )
> 6: curBucket ←𝐴 [𝑗 ].newID
> 7: count ←count +1
> 8: over ←OblGt (count ,PADSIZE )
> 9: 𝐴 [𝑗 ].isOverflow ←OblChoose (over ,1,0)

## D Oblivious Primitives 

Although TENNOR ’s request generation and OHT-based request iden-tification are oblivious by construction (§5.2), the subsequent in-bin 

processing must also avoid data-dependent leakage. Concretely, after an OHT bin is selected, TENNOR must (i) check which candi-date slots match the target request and (ii) copy the corresponding neuron/state into the request’s neuron-buffer. If implemented with ordinary branches (e.g., if statements) or data-dependent memory accesses, these steps can leak through the instruction trace (branch predictor) and microarchitectural effects. Therefore, TENNOR relies on branch-free, data-independent oblivious primitives for compari-son and conditional assignment. 

## D.1 Oblivious Comparison ( OblCompare )

OblCompare is the fundamental equality predicate used through-out TENNOR . It performs a branch-free, data-independent test of whether two scalar operands are equal [ 32 ]. Algorithm 12 shows the conceptual instruction sequence: a cmp instruction sets the processor flags based on the difference 𝑥 − 𝑦 , and sete copies the zero flag ( ZF ) into the output byte. This sequence contains no data-dependent jumps, no secret-dependent addressing, and no variable-length loops. 

OblCompare is consumed by operations that require identity checks, such as OHT lookup (Algorithm 4, line 7), label match-ing during backpropagation (Algorithm 7, line 9), and duplicate detection in oblivious merge (Algorithm 8, line 3). 

Algorithm 12 OblCompare (𝑥, 𝑦 )

Input: Scalars 𝑥 , 𝑦 

Output: eq = 1 iff 𝑥 = 𝑦 ; 0 otherwise  

> 1:

cmp 𝑦, 𝑥 ⊲ updates ZF ← ( 𝑥 − 𝑦 == 0) 

> 2:

sete eq ⊲ 𝑒𝑞 ← 1 if ZF ; 0 otherwise  

> 3:

return eq 

## D.2 Oblivious Greater-Than 

OblGt is an oblivious predicate that materializes a strict-greater-than bit for use by later branch-free updates [ 32 ]. For integral values, our implementation uses the x86 cmp /setg sequence, analogous to OblCompare . For floating-point values, we omit the algorith-mic details here, as it follows similar logic. A type-specific fixed FP/SIMD handles floating-point operands. OblCompare first sets its output from the zero flag ( ZF ) via sete , OblGt then reads the sign and overflow flags via setg (set if greater, signed comparison) after the same cmp instruction. The resulting instruction sequence (Algorithm 13) is identical in length and structure: it contains no data-dependent jumps, no secret-dependent addressing, and no variable-length loops, so the instruction trace is independent of the operand values. 

Algorithm 13 OblGt (𝑥, 𝑦 ) for integral operands 

Input: Scalars 𝑥 , 𝑦 

Output: gt = 1 iff 𝑥 > 𝑦  

> 1:

cmp 𝑦, 𝑥 ⊲ updates flags based on 𝑥 − 𝑦  

> 2:

setg gt ⊲ 𝑔𝑡 ← 1 if SF = OF and ZF = 0; 0 otherwise  

> 3:

return gt 

Together, OblCompare and OblGt form a minimal pair of branch-free predicates: OblCompare produces the equality predicate con-sumed by operations such as OHT lookup (Algorithm 4) and label matching (Algorithm 7), while OblGt produces the ordering predi-cate consumed by ReLU clamping and the oblivious maximum in the softmax pass (Algorithm 6). Both predicates serve as inputs to 

OblChoose (Algorithm 14), which performs the actual conditional data movement. 

## D.3 Oblivious Conditional Select ( OblChoose )

After obtaining a predicate from OblCompare or OblGt , TENNOR 

must select between two candidate values without revealing which one was chosen. Algorithm 14 shows the OblChoose primitive [ 32 ]. Given a Boolean predicate pred ∈ { 0, 1} and two candidate values 

𝑣 1, 𝑣 0, it returns 𝑣 1 if pred = 1 and 𝑣 0 otherwise, while producing an identical instruction and memory-access trace regardless of the predicate’s value. On x86, this is naturally implemented with a conditional move ( cmov ) that does not introduce a branch. 

## D.4 Byte-Level Oblivious Assignment (OblChooseBytes )

The scalar OblChoose (Algorithm 14) handles a single register-width value via one cmov instruction. In practice, however, TENNOR 

often needs to conditionally assign contiguous memory blocks . For instance, the weight array or the gradient accumulator array inside Algorithm 14 OblChoose (pred , 𝑣 1, 𝑣 0)

Input: pred ∈ { 0, 1}, values 𝑣 1, 𝑣 0

Output: Returns 𝑣 1 if pred = 1; 𝑣 0 otherwise  

> 1:

mov tmp, 𝑣 1 

> 2:

test pred, pred ⊲ sets ZF ← ( pred == 0) 

> 3:

cmovz tmp, 𝑣 0 ⊲ if ZF , tmp ← 𝑣 0 

> 4:

return tmp 

a neuron record, rather than a single scalar or an entire composite object at once. 

OblChooseBytes (Algorithm 15) generalises OblChoose to an arbitrary-length byte buffer. Given a predicate pred , two source buffers 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 (selected when pred = 1) and 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 (selected when 

pred = 0), and a destination buffer dst , each of 𝑁 bytes, it writes 

𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 into dst if pred = 1, and 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 into dst otherwise. Internally, it partitions the 𝑁 bytes into fixed-size chunks and applies OblChoose to each chunk, from largest to smallest. For 32-byte and 16-byte chunks, the single-scalar cmov in OblChoose is replaced by a wider vector conditional-select instruction (AVX2 or SSE) that processes the entire chunk; the semantics remain identical. The chunk decomposition depends only on the public buffer size 𝑁 ,so the instruction count and sequence are fixed regardless of pred .

Algorithm 15 OblChooseBytes (pred , 𝑁 , 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 , 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 , dst )

Input: pred ∈ { 0, 1}; byte buffers 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [0..𝑁 −1], 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [0..𝑁 −1],

dst [0..𝑁 −1]

Output: dst ← pred ? 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 : 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 ; instruction trace indepen-dent of pred  

> 1:

𝑘 ← 0 

> 2:

while 𝑘 + 32 ≤ 𝑁 do ⊲ 32-byte chunks via AVX2 vector 

OblChoose  

> 3:

dst [𝑘..𝑘 +31 ]← OblChoose (pred , 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +31 ], 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +31 ])  

> 4:

𝑘 ← 𝑘 + 32  

> 5:

end while  

> 6:

if 𝑘 + 16 ≤ 𝑁 then ⊲ 16-byte remainder via SSE vector 

OblChoose  

> 7:

dst [𝑘..𝑘 +15 ]← OblChoose (pred , 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +15 ], 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +15 ])  

> 8:

𝑘 ← 𝑘 + 16  

> 9:

if 𝑘 + 8 ≤ 𝑁 then ⊲ 8-byte remainder via scalar OblChoose  

> 10:

dst [𝑘..𝑘 +7]← OblChoose (pred , 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +7], 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +7])  

> 11:

𝑘 ← 𝑘 + 8 

> 12:

if 𝑘 + 4 ≤ 𝑁 then ⊲ 4-byte remainder  

> 13:

dst [𝑘..𝑘 +3]← OblChoose (pred , 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +3], 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +3])  

> 14:

𝑘 ← 𝑘 + 4 

> 15:

if 𝑘 + 2 ≤ 𝑁 then ⊲ 2-byte remainder  

> 16:

dst [𝑘..𝑘 +1]← OblChoose (pred , 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +1], 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘..𝑘 +1])  

> 17:

𝑘 ← 𝑘 + 2 

> 18:

if 𝑘 < 𝑁 then ⊲ 1-byte remainder  

> 19:

dst [𝑘 ] ← OblChoose (pred , 𝑡 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘 ], 𝑓 _𝑏𝑢 𝑓 [𝑘 ]) 

Usage in TENNOR . When processing a composite object such as a neuron record, TENNOR does not apply OblChooseBytes to the entire struct in one call. Instead, it applies OblChooseBytes sep-arately to each contiguous array field within the struct (e.g., the weight array 𝑢. weights [0..𝐷 ℓ −1], etc.), sharing the same predicate obtained from OblCompare or OblGt . This field-by-field approach avoids the need to pack the entire struct into a single contiguous buffer while still ensuring that every field is assigned in a fixed, branch-free manner. 

## D.5 Extending Primitives to Composite Objects 

The primitives defined in Sections D.1–D.4 operate on scalars and contiguous byte buffers. However, TENNOR ’s core data structures, such as neurons, request entries, and OHT slots, are composite objects containing a mix of scalar fields (e.g., neuron ID, flags, bias) and array fields (e.g., weights, gradient accumulators, moment esti-mates). To conditionally assign an entire composite object, TENNOR 

performs an oblivious structural copy : given a single predicate pred 

(obtained from OblCompare or OblGt ), it walks the struct’s fields in a fixed, publicly determined order and applies the appropriate primitive to each: 

• Scalar fields (e.g., ID, bias, flags, counters, etc.): a single 

OblChoose call per field. 

• Contiguous array fields (e.g., weight vector 𝑢. weights [0..𝐷 ℓ −

1], etc.): a single OblChooseBytes call per array, process-ing the buffer in 32/16/8/.../1-byte chunks as described in Section D.4. The number of fields, the size of each array, and the traversal order are all compile-time constants determined by the struct layout. No memory is allocated conditionally; all destination storage is pre-allocated, and the primitives only select which source values become visible at the destination. As a result, the instruction count and memory-access pattern of an oblivious structural copy depend only on the struct definition, not on the predicate or the data values. Concretely, when scanning candidate slots inside an OHT bin (Algorithm 4, lines 6–11), TENNOR applies an oblivious structural copy at every entry in this bin using the predicate from OblCom-pare . Every entry is written to the matching entries, which receive the actual neuron data, while non-matching entries receive their own current values (a self-assignment). The adversary therefore ob-serves the same sequence of memory accesses regardless of which slot is the true match. 

Oblivious Sorting. TENNOR uses a sorting-network-based oblivious sort, instantiated with the iterative formulation of bitonic sort [ 8 ]. The implementation consists of three nested loops whose bounds depend only on the (public) array length 𝑛 : the outer loop doubles the merge stride 𝑘 from 2 to 𝑛 , the middle loop halves the com-parison distance 𝑗 from 𝑘 /2 to 1, and the inner loop processes the public representatives 𝑖 ∈ [ 0, 𝑛 ) satisfying (𝑖 ⊕ 𝑗 ) > 𝑖 . For each 𝑖 ,the partner index 𝑖 ⊕ 𝑗 (bitwise XOR) and the comparison direction (ascending or descending, determined by the bit 𝑖 & 𝑘 ) are both fixed functions of 𝑖 , 𝑗 , and 𝑘 . They do not depend on element val-ues. At each representative pair, the two elements are compared to obtain a predicate and then conditionally swapped via OblChoose .Because all loop bounds, index pairs, and comparison directions are determined solely by the public array length, the iterative structure contains no data-dependent branches and no recursion, producing a fully fixed instruction and memory-access trace. 

Parallelism. For a given (𝑘, 𝑗 ), all representative pairs (𝑖, 𝑖 ⊕ 𝑗 )

satisfying (𝑖 ⊕ 𝑗 ) > 𝑖 are disjoint and independent. The inner loop can therefore be executed in parallel, which is a well-known property of bitonic sorting networks [8]. 

Non-power-of-two lengths. The iterative bitonic sort requires the array length to be a power of two. When the array length 𝑛 is not a power of two, TENNOR decomposes it as 𝑛 = 𝑚 + ( 𝑛 − 𝑚 ), where 

𝑚 is the largest power of two less than 𝑛 . The first 𝑚 elements are sorted (in reverse) using the iterative bitonic sort; the remaining 

𝑛 − 𝑚 elements are sorted recursively using the same decompo-sition; and the two halves are combined via an oblivious bitonic merge. The split point 𝑚 depends only on the public length 𝑛 , so the decomposition introduces no data-dependent branching. Because we extend OblChoose to composite objects (Section D.5) via OblChooseBytes (Section D.4), the conditional swap operates on entire composite records (e.g., request entries, neuron records) while keeping control flow, loop bounds, and accessed addresses unchanged. The adversary can observe that pairs of elements are ac-cessed in a fixed order (the sorting network’s structural guarantee), but cannot distinguish whether any pair was swapped. Therefore, the sorted order is not revealed, and the full oblivious sort is re-alized by combining the data-oblivious bitonic network with our composite OblChoose primitive. 

## E Security Proof E.1 Security Model 

We model TENNOR as a two-party computation between a User (i.e., 

𝑃 1) and a Hypervisor (i.e., 𝑃 2). The User holds input 𝑥 1 = (𝑃, 𝐷 ),consisting of public parameters 𝑃 and private training data 𝐷 . The Hypervisor holds input 𝑥 2 = 𝑃 . We adopt the standard real/ideal paradigm for secure two-party computation [16, 64]. 

Real world. In the real world, the two parties execute a proto-col 𝜋 TENNOR . Our protocol 𝜋 TENNOR is TENNOR running inside a TDX trust domain . The User sends their input 𝑥 1 = (𝑃, 𝐷 ) to the trust domain, which executes the TENNOR training algorithm and returns the trained model 𝑀 to the User. The Hypervisor is passive: it does not send messages to the trust domain. Although all code and data reside within the trust domain and are protected by hardware memory encryption, in a real implementation 

(as opposed to a theoretical framework), the Hypervisor can observe which encrypted memory locations are accessed at page and cache-line granularity. For the proof, we model these observations by a canonical algorithmic trace 𝜏 , consisting of symbolic object/offset accesses and public per-worker schedules. Concrete page/cache-line traces are covered only when the implementation maps symbolic accesses to addresses by a public layout and uses a public determin-istic interleaving, or the public per-worker trace abstraction, for parallel work. Formally, the view is defined as view H = {𝑃, 𝜏 }.

Ideal World. In the ideal world, trusted functionality Ftrain between 

𝑃 1 and 𝑃 2 is executed by a trusted party of the ideal world. Ftrain 

receives inputs from both parties, computes the result, and returns an output to each party: 

Ftrain 

(𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃  = 𝑀, ⊥,

where 𝑃 1’s input is (𝑃, 𝐷 ) and output is 𝑀 , while 𝑃 2’s input is 𝑃 and output is ⊥. The User receives the trained model 𝑀 ; the Hypervisor receives nothing ( ⊥). 

Functionality Ftrain 

(𝑀, ⊥) ← F train 

 (𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃 :1: Receive input (𝑃, 𝐷 ) from 𝑃 1 (User) and 𝑃 from 𝑃 2 (Hypervisor). 2: Train model 𝑀 on dataset 𝐷 with public parameters 𝑃 .3: return 𝑀 to 𝑃 1 and ⊥ to 𝑃 2.

Figure 9: Ideal training functionality. 

Security Definition. Following the standard semi-honest defini-tion [16, 64], we define: 

• Real 𝜋 TENNOR ,H (𝜅 ; (𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃 ): Run protocol 𝜋 TENNOR with secu-rity parameter 𝜅 , where the User uses input (𝑃, 𝐷 ) and the Hypervisor uses input 𝑃 . Let view H = {𝑃, 𝜏 } be the Hyper-visor’s view (its input 𝑃 and the observed trace 𝜏 ), and let the parties’ outputs be 𝑦 1 = 𝑀 , 𝑦 2 = ⊥.Output (view H, (𝑦 1, 𝑦 2)) .

• Ideal Ftrain ,S : Compute (𝑦 1, 𝑦 2) ← F train 

 (𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃 , where 

𝑦 1 = 𝑀 and 𝑦 2 = ⊥.Output  S( 𝑃, ⊥) , (𝑀, ⊥) .

Definition 1 (Security of TENNOR ). Protocol 𝜋 TENNOR securely re-alizes Ftrain in the presence of a semi-honest adversary (the Hy-pervisor) if there exists a PPT simulator S such that, for all public parameters 𝑃 and all datasets 𝐷 consistent with 𝑃 :

Ideal Ftrain ,S (𝜅 ; (𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃 ) ≈ Real 𝜋 TENNOR ,H (𝜅 ; (𝑃, 𝐷 ), 𝑃 )

where ≈ denotes computational indistinguishability with respect to the security parameter 𝜅 .Concretely, the simulator S receives only 𝑃 and must produce a simulated Hypervisor view indistinguishable from {𝑃, 𝜏 }. Since the Hypervisor is passive, the simulation task reduces to generating a trace that is indistinguishable from the real execution trace without knowledge of 𝐷 .

Simplification. The protocol 𝜋 TENNOR computes the same function as Ftrain . The only difference is how the output is produced. In 

TENNOR we follow an oblivious architecture with techniques such as dummy padding, oblivious sorting, and branch-free primitives that alter the memory access pattern but not the final output. There-fore, the outputs 𝑦 1 = 𝑀 and 𝑦 2 = ⊥ are identically distributed in both worlds, and the security condition reduces to comparing the Hypervisor’s view alone. Note that the joint distribution (view H, (𝑦 1, 𝑦 2)) is simulatable, not just the marginal view H. As we prove in Sections E.6–E.8, the canonical algorithmic trace 𝜏 produced by each component depends only on 𝑃 and on fresh randomness (e.g., dummy inputs) that is independent of the private data 𝐷 , and of the training outcome 𝑀 .Consequently, 𝜏 is independent of 𝑀 given 𝑃 , and the security condition reduces to simulating the Hypervisor’s trace alone. Definition 2 (Trace-based Security of TENNOR ). Protocol 𝜋 TENNOR 

securely realizes Ftrain if there exists a simulator S such that, for all 𝑃 and all 𝐷 consistent with 𝑃 :

S( 𝑃 ) ≈𝑐 

view 𝜋 TENNOR  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 )

where view 𝜋 TENNOR  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 ) = {𝑃, 𝜏 } is the Hypervisor’s (H) view dur-ing real execution, and ≈𝑐 denotes computational indistinguishabil-ity in the security parameter 𝜅 .

Simulator Convention. In the component proofs that follow, each simulator is described as an algorithm that mirrors the real pro-tocol’s control flow on dummy inputs. The simulator’s output in the security statement is the canonical algorithmic trace generated during its execution, denoted ˆ𝜏 . The data structures returned by the simulator (e.g., a dummy ReqArray or a dummy LSH table) are internal states used solely for composing consecutive components. They are not part of the Hypervisor’s view. Formally, S( 𝑃 ) denotes 

(𝑃, ˆ𝜏 ) where ˆ𝜏 is the canonical symbolic trace generated by the sim-ulator; the concrete-address caveat is the one stated in the security model above. 

## E.2 Public and Private Information. 

The adversary (Hypervisor, H) is assumed to know the following 

public parameters 𝑃 .

• NN architecture : the number of layers 𝐿 , the neuron count per layer (specifically, layer-0 size 𝑁 0), each layer’s weight dimension 𝐷 ℓ , and each layer’s activation type (ReLU or Softmax); 

• Training configuration : batch size 𝐵 , the number of train-ing iterations, the Adam optimizer [ 53 ] hyperparameters (𝛼, 𝛽 1, 𝛽 2, 𝜖 ), and the training step; 

• LSH configuration : the number of hash functions 𝐾 , the num-ber of buckets numLshBucs , the bucket capacity PADSIZE ,any dataset-dependent rule used to choose PADSIZE , the probing sequence length lenSeq ℓ , the MP-WTA parameters (𝑟 =3, 𝑁 =3), and the LSH rebuild period; 

• OHT configuration : the number of bins per tier numBin ,the bin capacity binCap , duplicate-record semantics for re-peated LSHbucketID values, and the no-observable-overflow/failure capacity contract; 

• Schedule metadata : all public hash descriptions or seeds, sampled WTA subsets, deterministic tie-breaking rules, and public optimization schedules used by O1–O3; 

• Data characteristics : the dataset size, the input dimensional-ity 𝐷 𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 , the number of non-zero features per input nnz ,the non-zero feature indices {𝑑 1, . . . , 𝑑 nnz } of each input, and the label count |𝑌 𝑖 | per input; 

• Derived quantities : the Request-Array size 𝑇 = 𝐵 · lenSeq ℓ ,the number of neuron slots per input ( 𝑅 ℓ = lenSeq ℓ ·PADSIZE 

for LSH-selected layers, and 𝑅 0 = 𝑁 0 for dense layer 0), and the Neuron Fetcher operation mode (Read/Write). These parameters fully determine all loop bounds, array dimensions, and traversal schedules throughout the protocol. 

TENNOR protects the following private information : the input train-ing data values 𝐷 ; all neuron weights, biases, activations, gradi-ents, deltas, and optimizer moment estimates; all data-dependent WTA/LSH signatures and neuron-to-bucket assignments; all train-ing label values 𝑌 𝑖 and input feature values 𝑥 𝑑 𝑗 ; and all intermediate quantities arising during execution (e.g., OHT contents, softmax normalization constants, and internal vectors used during feedfor-ward and backpropagation). 

Remark on input sparsity. TENNOR focuses on protecting the access patterns of the wide output layer, where data-dependent neuron selection via LSH creates the primary side-channel threat (Section 4, Figure 1). The non-zero feature indices {𝑑 1, . . . , 𝑑 nnz } of each input are treated as public because they affect the dense layer 0 feedfor-ward scan and the first-layer gradient update (Algorithm 7, Phase 3), which operate on the narrow input layer and do not involve LSH-based selection. Hiding sparse access patterns has been studied in both TEE-based systems [ 51 , 82 , 101 ] and MPC frameworks [ 31 , 90 ]. These techniques address an orthogonal concern and can be composed with TENNOR at an additional cost of 𝑂 (𝑁 0 · 𝐷 log 𝐷 ) per batch. We consider this complementary and leave integration to future work. 

## E.3 Oblivious Building Blocks 

We prove the security of TENNOR in the hybrid model [ 16 ]. In the hybrid model, the protocol may invoke a set of functionalities as black-box subroutines. Each such subroutine correctly computes its specified function and produces a trace that depends only on public parameters, which is oblivious. Security proven in the hybrid model extends to the fully instantiated protocol, since each func-tionality can be replaced by a concrete oblivious implementation while preserving security, via sequential composition [16]. Below we describe the functionalities that TENNOR uses in the hybrid model. Each corresponds to a standard oblivious primitive whose security has been established in prior work. 

Functionality FOSort 

𝐴 ′ ← F OSort (𝐴, 𝑛, key ):1: Sort the 𝑛 -element array 𝐴 by comparison key key .2: return sorted array 𝐴 ′.

Figure 10: Oblivious sort functionality. 

FOSort sorts an array of 𝑛 elements by a given comparison key. The trace depends only on 𝑛 ; a secure realization 𝜋 OSort exists via bitonic sort [8]. 

Functionality FOCmpSet 

FOCmpSet (𝑎, 𝑏, pred , dst ):1: Evaluate predicate pred on (𝑎, 𝑏 ).2: if pred is true, write 𝑎 to dst ; else write 𝑏 to dst .

Figure 11: Oblivious compare-and-set functionality. 

FOCmpSet is an umbrella functionality for the branch-free scalar steps used in TENNOR . It covers the compare and select steps behind OblCompare , OblGt , and OblChoose . The public input pred says which test is used. The values 𝑎 and 𝑏 are private. The trace does not depend on the truth value of the test or on the values 𝑎 and 𝑏 .A secure realization 𝜋 OCmpSet exists via branch-free compare and conditional move instructions [32, 82]. 

Functionality FOHT 

(𝑇 , H1, H2) ← F OHT .Build (𝑆, numBin , binCap ):1: Use the hash functions H1, H2 specified by 𝑃 .2: Construct a two-tier hash table 𝑇 from key-value pairs 𝑆 ,using H1, H2, with numBin bins of capacity binCap .3: return (𝑇 , H1, H2).

Figure 12: Oblivious hash table functionality. 

FOHT provides an oblivious build procedure for a fixed-capacity two-tier hash table. The build trace depends only on |𝑆 |, numBin ,

binCap . A secure realization 𝜋 OHT exists via [ 19 ]. In TENNOR , 𝑆 is a multiset of request records: duplicate private LSHbucketID values are treated as distinct records (requested by distinct inputs in a batch), and the public OHT capacity parameters are chosen to avoid observable overflow or failure for all request multisets of public size 𝑇 .We assume that the OHT build procedure does not perform data-dependent retries or hash-function resampling. The hash functions 

H1, H2 are specified by 𝑃 before examining the key-value pairs. Items are placed into fixed-capacity bins via oblivious sort; no Cuckoo-style eviction loop is used. The standard capacity analysis of [ 19 ] applies when its load assumptions hold; for TENNOR’s duplicate-request case, the theorem relies on the explicit public-capacity contract above. 

## E.4 Functionalities of TENNOR ’s Components 

We organize one batch step of 𝜋 TENNOR into three sequential compo-nents, namely Neuron Requester, Neuron Fetcher, and Neuron Up-dater, each with its own functionality. Each functionality is a black box that receives inputs (including the public parameters 𝑃 ), com-putes the specified operation, and returns outputs. All quantities as-sociated with 𝑃 (such as 𝑇 = 𝐵 ·lenSeq ℓ and 𝑅 ℓ = lenSeq ℓ ·PADSIZE )are implicitly available to the functionality. Because these three batch-step components execute strictly se-quentially (the nonconcurrency condition required by the compo-sition theorem [ 16 ]), their composed security follows from their individual security guarantees. 

Freq computes the MP-WTA probing sequence for each input in the batch and assembles the Request-Array .

Ffetch transfers data between the Request-Array and the LSH table. In Read mode it populates each entry’s Neuron-Buffer from the matching LSH bucket and returns the LSH table unchanged. In 

Write mode, it writes modified neurons back to the LSH table and returns both the updated ReqArray ℓ and LSH ℓ . All outputs are delivered to the User (the TD), the Hypervisor receives ⊥.

Fupd performs the complete update cycle on the populated neurons in the Request-Array and on dense layer 0, including feedforward activation, backpropagation, gradient merge, and optimizer step. 

Functionality Freq 

ReqArray ℓ ← F req (ℓ, {𝑞 1, . . . , 𝑞 𝐵 }, 𝑃 ):1: For each input 𝑞 𝑖 in the batch, compute its MP-WTA probing sequence and assemble the corresponding 

Request-Array entries, each containing an LSHbucketID , a Batch-Rank , and a dummy Neuron-Buffer of PADSIZE entries. 2: return ReqArray ℓ of size 𝑇 = 𝐵 · lenSeq ℓ .

Figure 13: Functionality for Neuron Requester. Functionality Ffetch 

(ReqArray ′ 

> ℓ

, LSH ′ 

> ℓ

) ← F fetch (ReqArray ℓ , LSH ℓ , mode , 𝑃 ):1: if mode = Read , populate each entry’s 

Neuron-Buffer with the neurons stored in the LSH bucket matching its LSHbucketID .

LSH ′ 

> ℓ

← LSH ℓ .2: if mode = Write , write each non-dummy entry’s 

Neuron-Buffer back to the matching LSH bucket. 

LSH ′ 

> ℓ

reflects the updated table. 3: return (ReqArray ′ 

> ℓ

, LSH ′ 

> ℓ

).

Figure 14: Functionality for Neuron Fetcher. Functionality Fupd 

ReqArray ℓ ← F upd (ReqArray ℓ , ActiveNodes , ActiveVals ,

{𝑌 𝑖 }, {x𝑖 }, 𝑃 ):1: Perform feedforward: compute activations for all inputs across the populated Request-Array .2: Perform backpropagation: compute and accumulate gradients for all neurons in the Request-Array .3: Merge duplicate neurons that are in the duplicate entries sharing the same LSHbucketID 

by consolidating their gradient accumulators. 4: Apply the Adam optimizer to update all neuron weights and biases. 5: return updated ReqArray ℓ .

Figure 15: Functionality for Neuron Updater. 

For readability, the displayed interface suppresses the dense layer 0 state; it is passed through the updater, updated by the public-order dense scan, and returned with the same public shape. 

## E.5 Security Statements 

We now state the security of the three components. Each theo-rem below is a hybrid-model statement. It proves security while the primitive calls inside the component are still ideal calls to the building blocks from Section E.3. The step that replaces those ideal primitive calls by the real primitive protocols is given later in Sec-tion E.9. 

Theorem 2 (Hybrid-model security of Neuron Requester) . Proto-col 𝜋 req (Algorithm 2) securely realizes Freq in the FOCmpSet -hybrid model. That is, there exists a simulator Sreq such that for all 𝑃 and all 𝐷 consistent with 𝑃 :

Sreq (𝑃 ) ≈𝑐 

view 𝜋 req  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 ) .

Theorem 3 (Hybrid-model security of Neuron Fetcher) . Proto-col 𝜋 fetch (Algorithm 4) securely realizes Ffetch in the (F OHT , FOSort ,

FOCmpSet )-hybrid model. That is, there exists a simulator Sfetch such that for all 𝑃 and all 𝐷 consistent with 𝑃 :

Sfetch (𝑃 ) ≈𝑐 

view 𝜋 fetch  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 ) .

Theorem 4 (Hybrid-model security of Neuron Updater) . Proto-col 𝜋 upd (Algorithms 6, 7, 8, and 9) securely realizes Fupd in the 

(F OSort , FOCmpSet )-hybrid model. This theorem is for the two-layer 

TENNOR architecture analyzed in Appendix C.3, where layer 0 is scanned densely for feedforward and optimizer updates, and the wide output layer is the LSH-selected layer. That is, there exists a simulator 

Supd such that for all 𝑃 and all 𝐷 consistent with 𝑃 :

Supd (𝑃 ) ≈𝑐 

view 𝜋 upd  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 ) .

The proofs of these three theorems are given next. After that we prove one batch step, then the full training loop. 

## E.6 Proof of Theorem 2: Security of Neuron Requester 

Figure 16 defines the protocol 𝜋 req and Figure 17 defines the simu-lator Sreq .

Protocol 𝜋 req 

ReqArray ℓ ← 𝜋 req (ℓ, {𝑞 1, . . . , 𝑞 𝐵 }, 𝑃 ):1: Allocate ReqArray ℓ [0..𝑇 − 1] with 𝑇 = 𝐵 · lenSeq ℓ .2: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝐵 :

Seq 𝑖 ← MP-WTA (𝑞 𝑖 , ℎ 1, . . . , ℎ 𝐾 )

(Algorithm 1; internally invokes FOCmpSet 

via ℎ2-WTA (Algorithm 3) and ℎ3-WTA )3: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝐵 , for 𝑡 = 0 to lenSeq ℓ − 1:populate ReqArray ℓ [( 𝑖 − 1) · lenSeq ℓ + 𝑡 ]

(Algorithm 2, lines 6–12). 4: return ReqArray ℓ .

Figure 16: Protocol for Neuron Requester (in the FOCmpSet -hybrid model). Protocol Description. The protocol 𝜋 req corresponds directly to Algorithm 2. It first allocates a Request-Array of fixed public size 

𝑇 = 𝐵 · lenSeq ℓ (step 1). For each input 𝑞 𝑖 in the batch, it computes the MP-WTA probing sequence (step 2) by invoking Algorithm 1, which internally calls Algorithm 3 to determine the maximum, second-maximum, and third-maximum indices within each WTA hash function’s sampled subset. Each such max/second-max/third-max computation uses FOCmpSet for branch-free comparison and selection. Finally, the protocol writes one entry per probe into the 

Request-Array at a deterministic position (step 3). 

Simulator Sreq (𝑃 )                                                         

> ReqArray ℓ← S req (𝑃 ):0: Generate random {ˆ𝑞 1, . . . ˆ𝑞 𝐵 }as dummy inputs 1: Allocate ReqArray ℓ[0..𝑇 −1]with 𝑇 =𝐵 ·lenSeq ℓ;2: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 :Invoke FOCmpSet exactly as MP-WTA
> (Algorithm 1 via Algorithm 3) would on an random input ˆ𝑞 𝑖 of the same dimension, to produce a dummy probing sequence ˆSeq 𝑖
> of length lenSeq ℓ.3: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑡 =0to lenSeq ℓ−1:write a dummy entry to ReqArray ℓ[ ( 𝑖 −1) · lenSeq ℓ+𝑡 ].4: return ReqArray ℓ.

Figure 17: Simulator for Neuron Requester. Simulator description. The simulator Sreq receives only the public parameters 𝑃 and has no access to the real inputs {𝑞 1, . . . , 𝑞 𝐵 }. It mirrors the structure of 𝜋 req step by step, replacing each real input 

𝑞 𝑖 with a random dummy vector ˆ𝑞 𝑖 of the same public dimension. In step 2, the simulator executes the same MP-WTA procedure on ˆ𝑞 𝑖 , issuing the same sequence of FOCmpSet calls. Since FOCmpSet 

produces a trace independent of its input values, the trace generated by each FOCmpSet invocation on ˆ𝑞 𝑖 is identical to that on 𝑞 𝑖 . In step 3, the simulator writes dummy entries to the same deterministic positions in the Request-Array as the real protocol. 

Proof of Theorem 2. We compare the traces of 𝜋 req and Sreq 

step by step. 

Step 1 (allocation): Both the protocol and the simulator allocate an array of the same public size 𝑇 . The trace (a sequence of memory writes to 𝑇 consecutive locations) is identical. 

Step 2 (MP-WTA): For each input 𝑖 ∈ [1 . . . 𝐵 ], Algorithm 1 executes the following: 

• Algorithm 3 computes the max, second-max, and third-max indices across all 𝐾 hash functions. For each hash function, this requires a fixed number of FOCmpSet invocations de-termined by the window size 𝑀 , which is public. By the security of FOCmpSet (Figure 11), each invocation produces a trace independent of the operand values. 

• The perturbation loop (Algorithm 1, lines 4–9) iterates over all subsets of size 𝑛 ∈ { 1, 2, 3} among 𝐾 positions and all tuples with values in {2, 3}. The loop bounds depend only on 𝐾 , 𝑟 =3, and 𝑁 =3, all public. The body performs deter-ministic array copies with no FOCmpSet calls. Therefore, the trace produced by step 2 on real input 𝑞 𝑖 is indistin-guishable from that on dummy input ˆ𝑞 𝑖 .

Step 3 (array population): Both the protocol and the simulator write to position (𝑖 − 1) · lenSeq ℓ + 𝑡 for each (𝑖, 𝑡 ). The write addresses are deterministic functions of public parameters. The values written differ (real vs. dummy), but values reside in TDX-encrypted memory and are not part of the trace. The traces are therefore identical. Step 4 (return): No additional memory accesses. The next step is replacing each building-block functionality with its concrete oblivious implementation (e.g., 𝜋 OCmpSet for FOCmpSet )preserves indistinguishability by the sequential composition theo-rem [ 16 , Corollary 7], since all building-block invocations within 

𝜋 req execute sequentially. (See Appendix E.9 for additional details.) Since the traces are identical in every step, we have: 

{S req (𝑃 )} ≈ 𝑐 {view 𝜋 req  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 )} .

□

## E.7 Proof of Theorem 3: Security of Neuron Fetcher 

Figure 18 defines the protocol 𝜋 fetch and Figure 19 defines the simu-lator Sfetch .

Protocol 𝜋 fetch 

(ReqArray ′ 

> ℓ

, LSH ′ 

> ℓ

) ← 𝜋 fetch (ReqArray ℓ , LSH ℓ , mode , 𝑃 ):

// Phase 1: OHT construction 

1: (OHT , H1, H2) ← F OHT .Build (ReqArray ℓ ,

numBin , binCap )

(Algorithm 4, line 2; internally invokes FOSort ). 

// Phase 2: linear scan of LSH table 

2: for 𝑏 = 0 to numLshBucs − 1:compute bin 1 ← H1 (𝑏 ), bin 2 ← H2 (𝑏 ).

for tier ∈ { 1, 2}:

for each of binCap entries 𝑒 in OHT .bins [bin tier ]:invoke FOCmpSet to test 𝑒. LSHbucketID = 𝑏 

(and, in Write mode, that 𝑒 is non-dummy) and conditionally transfer neurons between 

LSH ℓ [𝑏 ] and 𝑒. Neuron-Buffer 

(direction determined by mode ). (Algorithm 4, lines 3–13.) 

// Phase 3: restore Request-Array 

3: Collect all entries from OHT bins into a flat array 𝐴 .4: FOSort (𝐴, key = (isDummy , Batch-Rank )) .(Algorithm 4, lines 14–16.) 5: ReqArray ′ 

> ℓ

← 𝐴 [0..𝑇 − 1].6: return (ReqArray ′ 

> ℓ

, LSH ′ 

> ℓ

).

Figure 18: Protocol for Neuron Fetcher (in the 

(F OHT , FOSort , FOCmpSet )-hybrid model). Protocol description. The protocol 𝜋 fetch corresponds directly to Algorithm 4. It operates in three phases. In Phase 1 (step 1), the 𝑇 

entries of ReqArray ℓ are transformed into an Oblivious Hash Table via FOHT .Build , which internally invokes FOSort to place entries into fixed-capacity bins keyed by LSHbucketID . The Build procedure uses the two OHT hash functions H1, H2 specified by 𝑃 . In Phase 2 (step 2), the protocol performs a linear scan over all numLshBucs 

buckets of the LSH table. For each LSH bucket 𝑏 , it computes the two candidate OHT bins via H1 (𝑏 ) and H2 (𝑏 ), then iterates over all binCap entries in each bin. At every entry, FOCmpSet is invoked to test whether the entry’s LSHbucketID matches 𝑏 (and, in Write 

mode, that the entry is non-dummy), and to conditionally trans-fer neurons between LSH ℓ [𝑏 ] and the entry’s Neuron-Buffer ; the direction of transfer is determined by mode . Because FOCmpSet 

always performs a write regardless of the match outcome, ev-ery iteration produces the same trace. In Phase 3 (steps 3–5), all OHT entries are collected into a flat array and sorted via FOSort 

by (isDummy , Batch-Rank ), placing non-dummy entries first, fol-lowed by dummy padding, to restore the fixed-length ReqArray ℓ .The protocol returns both the restored ReqArray ′ 

> ℓ

and LSH ′ 

> ℓ

(which is unchanged in Read mode and updated in place in Write mode). 

Simulator Sfetch (𝑃 )(ReqArray ′ 

> ℓ

, LSH ′ 

> ℓ

) ← S fetch (𝑃 ):0: Initialize 𝑇 dummy entries, each with a fresh random 

LSHbucketID , Batch-Rank , and dummy Neuron-Buffer .Initialize a dummy LSH table with numLshBucs buckets, each filled with PADSIZE dummy neurons. 

// Phase 1: OHT construction 

1: ( OHT , ˆH1, ˆH2) ← F OHT .Build (𝑇 dummy entries ,

numBin , binCap ).

// Phase 2: linear scan of dummy LSH table 

2: for 𝑏 = 0 to numLshBucs − 1:compute bin 1 ← ˆH1 (𝑏 ), bin 2 ← ˆH2 (𝑏 ).

for tier ∈ { 1, 2}:

for each of binCap entries 𝑒 in OHT .bins [bin tier ]:invoke FOCmpSet on dummy values. 

// Phase 3: restore Request-Array 

3: Collect all entries from OHT bins into a flat array 𝐴 .4: FOSort (𝐴, key = (isDummy , Batch-Rank )) .5: ReqArray ′ 

> ℓ

← 𝐴 [0..𝑇 − 1].6: return (ReqArray ′ 

> ℓ

, LSH ′ 

> ℓ

).

Figure 19: Simulator for Neuron Fetcher. Simulator description. The simulator Sfetch receives only 𝑃 and has no access to the real ReqArray ℓ or LSH ℓ . Its OHT build uses the same public hash functions specified by 𝑃 . It then mirrors the three-phase structure of 𝜋 fetch , replacing all private data with dummy val-ues. In Phase 1, the simulator invokes FOHT .Build on 𝑇 dummy en-tries and obtains ( OHT , ˆH1, ˆH2); the call to FOHT .Build produces a trace that depends only on 𝑇 , numBin , binCap , and 𝑃 , not on the en-try contents. In Phase 2, the simulator iterates over all numLshBucs 

buckets and, for each LSH bucket 𝑏 , computes ˆH1 (𝑏 ) and ˆH2 (𝑏 )

to determine which OHT bins to visit. The simulator then scans all binCap entries per bin, invoking FOCmpSet on dummy values at every entry. In Phase 3, the simulator collects and sorts entries via 

FOSort on an array of the same public size. 

Proof of Theorem 3. We compare the traces of 𝜋 fetch and Sfetch 

phase by phase. 

Phase 1 (OHT construction). Both the protocol and the simulator invoke FOHT .Build on an array of 𝑇 entries. By the security of FOHT (Figure 12), the build trace depends only on the number of entries 𝑇 ,the number of bins numBin , and the bin capacity binCap , all of which are public. The entry contents (real or dummy) do not affect the trace. The traces are therefore identical. 

Phase 2 (linear scan). In both executions, the OHT hash functions are produced as part of FOHT .Build ’s output. By the security of FOHT 

(Figure 12), the build procedure, using the public hash functions specified by 𝑃 , produces a trace and outputs that depend only on 

|𝑆 |, numBin , binCap , and 𝑃 , not on the key-value contents. Since the real protocol and the simulator both use the same public hash functions from 𝑃 , they evaluate the same (H1, H2) on the same public sequence 𝑏 = 0, . . . , numLshBucs − 1. Thus the bin access sequences are identical conditional on 𝑃 .Note that the hash functions H1, H2 are public. This does not weaken security because, even if the OHT hash functions were kept private, the Hypervisor could observe from the trace which two OHT bins are accessed for each LSH bucket 𝑏 , and thereby reconstruct H1 (𝑏 ) and H2 (𝑏 ) for every 𝑏 . Making the hash functions public therefore reveals no information beyond what is already present in the trace. 

Phase 3 (Request-Array restoration). Both executions collect all OHT bin entries into a flat array of the same public size ( numBin ×

binCap per tier, summed over both tiers) and invoke FOSort with key (isDummy , Batch-Rank ). By the security of FOSort (Figure 10), the sort trace depends only on the array length. The subsequent extraction of the first 𝑇 entries accesses the same deterministic positions. The traces are therefore identical. Combining all three phases, the traces produced by 𝜋 fetch and Sfetch 

are identically distributed. Replacing each ideal functionality with its concrete oblivious implementation (e.g., 𝜋 OSort for FOSort , 𝜋 OHT 

for FOHT , 𝜋 OCmpSet for FOCmpSet ) preserves indistinguishability by the sequential composition theorem [ 16 , Corollary 7], since all building-block invocations within 𝜋 fetch execute sequentially. (Refer to Appendix E.9 for additional details.) We conclude: 

{S fetch (𝑃 )} ≈ 𝑐 {view 𝜋 fetch  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 )} .

□

## E.8 Proof of Theorem 4: Security of Neuron Updater 

Figure 20 defines the protocol 𝜋 upd and Figure 21 defines the simu-lator Supd .

Protocol description. The protocol 𝜋 upd comprises four phases corresponding to four sub-algorithms. Phase 1 (steps 1–2) performs feedforward (Algorithm 6). For each input 𝑖 and slot 𝑟 , it retrieves Request-Array neurons via SlotNode 

(Algorithm 5) and dense layer 0 neurons in public order. The activa-tion is computed as a weighted sum over the previous layer’s active state. For ReLU layers, the activation is clamped to zero via FOCmpSet 

(an OblGt followed by an OblChoose ). For the Softmax output layer, a running oblivious maximum is maintained via FOCmpSet , followed by a second pass that computes stable exponentials, sets zero value 

Protocol 𝜋 upd                                                                                                                                               

> ReqArray ℓ←𝜋 upd (ReqArray ℓ,ActiveNodes ,ActiveVals ,
> {𝑌 𝑖 },{x𝑖 }, 𝑃 ):
> // Phase 1: Feed-Forward (Algorithm 6.) 1: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑟 =1to 𝑅 ℓ:retrieve Request-Array neurons via SlotNode ;retrieve dense layer 0 neurons in public order; compute activation from previous layer; apply ReLU or Softmax via FOCmpSet .2: if Softmax: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑟 =1to 𝑅 ℓ:compute stable exponential; set zero value to dummy slots via FOCmpSet ;accumulate normalization constant.
> // Phase 2: Backpropagation (Algorithm 7.) 3: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑟 =1to 𝑅 ℓ:compute output-layer delta; match labels via FOCmpSet .3a: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑛 =1to 𝑁 0:reset dense-layer delta scratch state. 4: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑟 𝑢 =1to 𝑅 𝐿 −1,
> for 𝑛 =1to 𝑁 0:propagate delta (gated by ReLU via FOCmpSet ); accumulate weight gradient. 5: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑛 =1to 𝑁 0:accumulate first-layer gradients from input features.
> // Phase 3: Oblivious Merge (Algorithm 8.) 6: FOSort (ReqArray ℓ,key =LSHbucketID ).7: for 𝑗 =𝑇 −1down to 1:invoke FOCmpSet to test adjacent entries and conditionally fold gradients; mark donor as dummy. 8: FOSort (ReqArray ℓ,key =isDummy ).
> // Phase 4: Adam Update (Algorithm 9.) 9: for 𝑘 =0to 𝑇 −1,for 𝑠 =0to PADSIZE −1:update moments and weights (pure arithmetic). also scan dense layer 0 in public order. 10: return ReqArray ℓ.

Figure 20: Protocol for Neuron Updater (in the 

(F OSort , FOCmpSet )-hybrid model). 

to dummy slots via FOCmpSet , and accumulates the normalization constant. All loop bounds ( 𝐵 , 𝑅 ℓ , 𝑅 ℓ −1) are determined by 𝑃 .Phase 2 (steps 3–5) performs backpropagation (Algorithm 7). Step 3 computes output-layer deltas: for each neuron slot, a scan over |𝑌 𝑖 | labels invokes FOCmpSet per label for oblivious matching, then FOCmpSet selects the appropriate delta. Step 4 propagates deltas from the output layer to dense layer 0: the nested loop over 𝑅 𝐿 −1×𝑁 0

pairs invokes FOCmpSet to gate the delta propagation by the ReLU derivative and to accumulate weight gradients. Step 5 accumulates first-layer gradients from input features over 𝑁 0 × nnz iterations with no oblivious primitives (all indices are public). All loop bounds are determined by 𝑃 .Phase 3 (steps 6–8) performs oblivious merge (Algorithm 8). Step 6 invokes FOSort to group request entries by LSHbucketID .Step 7 performs a backward linear scan over all 𝑇 entries, invok-ing FOCmpSet at each pair to test for duplicate LSHbucketID s and conditionally fold gradients. Step 8 invokes FOSort to push marked-dummy entries to the end. Phase 4 (step 9) applies the Adam optimizer (Algorithm 9). It performs a flat linear scan over all 𝑇 × PADSIZE neuron slots, exe-cuting identical fixed arithmetic at every slot, and also scans dense layer 0 in public order. No oblivious primitives are required; dummy neurons produce zero updates due to their zero gradient accumula-tors. 

Simulator Supd (𝑃 )                                                                                                                                                                        

> ReqArray ℓ← S upd (𝑃 ):0: Initialize a dummy ReqArray ℓof 𝑇 entries, each with a
> Neuron-Buffer of PADSIZE zero-valued neurons. Initialize dummy ActiveNodes ,ActiveVals of public sizes; Initialize dummy labels {ˆ𝑌 𝑖 }and dummy inputs {ˆx𝑖 }
> of public size |𝑌 𝑖 |and input dimensions.
> // Phase 1: Feed-Forward
> 1: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑟 =1to 𝑅 ℓ:use SlotNode for Request-Array slots; use public-order access for dense layer 0; perform arithmetic on dummies; invoke FOCmpSet for ReLU or Softmax. 2: if Softmax: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑟 =1to 𝑅 ℓ:compute dummy exponential; invoke FOCmpSet to zero out dummy slots; accumulate dummy normalization constant.
> // Phase 2: Backpropagation
> 3: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑟 =1to 𝑅 ℓ:
> for each of |𝑌 𝑖 |dummy labels: invoke FOCmpSet .invoke FOCmpSet to select dummy delta. 3a: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑛 =1to 𝑁 0:reset dummy dense-layer delta scratch state. 4: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑟 𝑢 =1to 𝑅 𝐿 −1,
> for 𝑛 =1to 𝑁 0:invoke FOCmpSet for dummy delta propagation; perform dummy gradient accumulation. 5: for 𝑖 =1to 𝐵 ,for 𝑛 =1to 𝑁 0:
> for 𝑗 =1to nnz : perform dummy first-layer gradient.
> // Phase 3: Oblivious Merge
> 6: FOSort (ReqArray ℓ,key =LSHbucketID ).7: for 𝑗 =𝑇 −1down to 1:invoke FOCmpSet on adjacent dummy entries. 8: FOSort (ReqArray ℓ,key =isDummy ).
> // Phase 4: Adam Update
> 9: for 𝑘 =0to 𝑇 −1,for 𝑠 =0to PADSIZE −1:perform dummy arithmetic over 𝐷 ℓweight dimensions. also scan dummy dense layer 0 in public order. 10: return ReqArray ℓ.

Figure 21: Simulator for Neuron Updater. Simulator description. The simulator Supd receives only 𝑃 and has no access to the real ReqArray ℓ , activations, labels {𝑌 𝑖 }, or input features {x𝑖 }. It mirrors the four-phase structure of 𝜋 upd ,replacing all private data with dummy values (e.g., zero-valued neurons, random labels, zero-valued features). In Phase 1 (steps 1–2), the simulator initializes dummy data struc-tures of the same public sizes and executes the same feedforward loop structure. It also executes the dense layer 0 feedforward scan on dummy dense records in the same public order. For Request-Array slots, it invokes SlotNode ; for dense layer 0, it uses the same public-order scan. The arithmetic (weighted sums, exponentials) is performed on dummy values; FOCmpSet is invoked at exactly the same points as in 𝜋 upd for ReLU gating, oblivious maximum, and dummy zeroing. In Phase 2 (steps 3–5), the simulator executes the same back-propagation loop structure. Step 3 scans |𝑌 𝑖 | dummy labels per slot, invoking FOCmpSet at each label and once for delta selection. Step 4 iterates over the same 𝑅 𝐿 −1 × 𝑁 0 nested loop, invoking FOCmpSet 

for each pair. Step 5 iterates over 𝑁 0 × nnz pairs; since the non-zero feature indices are public (included in 𝑃 ), the simulator accesses the same weight dimensions as the real protocol. In Phase 3 (steps 6–8), the simulator invokes FOSort and FOCmpSet 

on the same-sized dummy arrays, following the identical merge procedure. In Phase 4 (step 9), the simulator performs the same arithmetic loop over Request-Array slots and all 𝐷 ℓ weight dimensions, with no oblivious primitives. For dense layer 0, it performs the same public-order Adam scan over dummy dense records. 

Proof of Theorem 4. We compare the traces of 𝜋 upd and Supd 

phase by phase. 

Phase 1 (feedforward): Both executions perform identical loop structures with bounds 𝐵 × 𝑅 ℓ (Pass 1) and 𝐵 × 𝑅 ℓ (Pass 2, Soft-max only), all determined by 𝑃 . For Request-Array slots, SlotNode 

computes a deterministic index from (𝑖, 𝑟, 𝑃 ) alone (Algorithm 5); dense layer 0 uses public-order addresses, so both executions ac-cess the same modeled positions. The weighted-sum computation (Algorithm 6, lines 6–8) iterates over 𝑅 ℓ −1 previous-layer slots, with 

𝑅 0 = 𝑁 0 for dense layer 0, using publicly determined addressing; the operand values differ but reside in encrypted memory and are not part of the trace. Each invocation of FOCmpSet (for ReLU clamp-ing, oblivious maximum, and dummy zeroing) produces a trace independent of the operand values by Figure 11. The traces are therefore identical. 

Phase 2 (backpropagation): Step 3 iterates over 𝐵 ×𝑅 ℓ slots. Within each iteration, the label-matching loop runs |𝑌 𝑖 | times, invoking 

FOCmpSet at each label and once for delta selection. Both 𝑅 ℓ and 

|𝑌 𝑖 | are public. Before Step 4, both executions perform the same public-order 𝐵 × 𝑁 0 reset of dense-layer delta scratch state. Step 4 iterates over the output-layer slots and dense layer-0 neurons, with a nested loop of 𝐵 × 𝑅 𝐿 −1 × 𝑁 0 iterations. At each iteration, both executions invoke FOCmpSet for ReLU-gated delta propagation and perform arithmetic accumulation at addresses determined by public loop indices. Step 5 iterates over 𝐵 × 𝑁 0 × nnz entries. The weight dimension accessed at each iteration is 𝑑 𝑗 , the 𝑗 -th non-zero feature index, which is public (included in 𝑃 ). Therefore, both executions access the same addresses. By the security of FOCmpSet , all invoca-tions produce value-independent traces. The traces are therefore identical. 

Phase 3 (oblivious merge): Step 6 invokes FOSort on an array of size 𝑇 . By Figure 10, the sort trace depends only on 𝑇 . Step 7 performs a linear scan from 𝑗 = 𝑇 − 1 down to 1, invoking FOCmpSet 

at each of the 𝑇 − 1 pairs. By Figure 11, each invocation produces a value-independent trace. Step 8 invokes FOSort on the same array of size 𝑇 . The traces are therefore identical. 

Phase 4 (Adam update): Both executions iterate over 𝑇 ×PADSIZE 

neuron slots, and within each slot over 𝐷 ℓ weight dimensions plus the bias. For dense layer 0, both executions also perform the same public-order Adam scan over all 𝑁 0 dense records. No oblivious primitives are invoked. All loop bounds ( 𝑇 , PADSIZE , 𝐷 ℓ , and 𝑁 0

for the dense scan) and the bias-corrected learning rate (which depends on step , 𝛼 , 𝛽 1, 𝛽 2, all public) are determined by 𝑃 . Every Request-Array slot executes the same sequence of reads and writes at SlotNode -determined addresses, and every dense-layer slot is visited in public order. The traces are therefore identical. The next step is replacing each building-block functionality with its concrete oblivious implementation (e.g., 𝜋 OSort for FOSort , 𝜋 OCmpSet 

for FOCmpSet ) preserves indistinguishability by the sequential com-position theorem [ 16 , Corollary 7], since all building-block invoca-tions within 𝜋 upd execute sequentially. (Refer to Appendix E.9 for additional details.) Since the traces are identical in every phase, we have: 

{S upd (𝑃 )} ≈ 𝑐 {view 𝜋 upd  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 )} .

□

## E.9 Replacing Ideal Primitive Calls by Real Primitive Protocols 

We now show the missing step that turns the three hybrid-model theorems into concrete component statements. For a component 

𝐶 ∈ { req , fetch , upd }, let 𝜋 F 

> 𝐶

be the version of that component in which every primitive call is still an ideal call to one of FOSort ,

FOCmpSet , or FOHT . Let 𝑔 1, . . . , 𝑔 𝑚 be these primitive calls listed in program order. A call list is in program order if 𝑔 𝑖 happens before 𝑔 𝑖 +1 in every execution. This is well defined here because all primitive calls inside each component run one after another. 

Lemma 5 (Primitive replacement inside one component). 

Assume that every real primitive protocol securely realizes its match-ing functionality. Then, for each component 𝐶 ∈ { req , fetch , upd },replacing the ideal calls 𝑔 1, . . . , 𝑔 𝑚 in 𝜋 F 

> 𝐶

one by one by their real primitive protocols preserves computational indistinguishability. 

Proof. Fix one component 𝐶 . Define a hybrid sequence 𝐻 0 

> 𝐶

, 𝐻 1 

> 𝐶

,. . . , 𝐻 𝑚 𝐶 as follows. In 𝐻 0 

> 𝐶

, all primitive calls are ideal calls. In 𝐻 𝑗 𝐶 , the first 𝑗 primitive calls are replaced by their real primitive protocols, and the remaining calls stay ideal. Thus 𝐻 0 

> 𝐶

is 𝜋 F 

> 𝐶

, and 𝐻 𝑚 𝐶 is the fully concrete component protocol. Suppose for contradiction that there is an index 𝑗 ∈ [ 1..𝑚 ] and a distinguisher D that tells 𝐻 𝑗 −1 

> 𝐶

from 𝐻 𝑗 𝐶 with non-negligible advantage. We build an adversary A𝑗 against the security of the 

𝑗 -th primitive protocol as follows. Adversary A𝑗 simulates the entire component execution for D. For the first 𝑗 − 1 primitive calls it uses the real primitive protocols. For the last 𝑚 − 𝑗 primitive calls it uses the functionalities. For the 𝑗 -th call it forwards the inputs of that call to its challenge oracle. If the challenge oracle is the functionality, then the view generated for D is distributed exactly as in 𝐻 𝑗 −1 

> 𝐶

. If the challenge oracle is the real primitive protocol, then the view generated for D is distributed exactly as in 𝐻 𝑗 𝐶 . Therefore any non-negligible advantage of D gives the same non-negligible advantage to A𝑗 . This contradicts the assumed security of that primitive protocol. Hence every adjacent pair 𝐻 𝑗 −1

> 𝐶

and 𝐻 𝑗 𝐶 is computationally indistinguishable. By chaining these pairs, we get 𝐻 0 

> 𝐶

≈𝑐 𝐻 𝑚 𝐶 . □

Corollary 1 (Concrete security of the three components) . Assume that 𝜋 OCmpSet , 𝜋 OSort , and 𝜋 OHT securely realize FOCmpSet , FOSort ,and FOHT , respectively. Then the concrete protocols 𝜋 req , 𝜋 fetch , and 

𝜋 upd securely realize Freq , Ffetch , and Fupd , respectively. 

Proof. Theorems 2, 3, and 4 prove the hybrid-model claims for the three components. Lemma 5 then replaces the ideal primitive calls inside each component by the real primitive protocols. □

Optimized Fetcher schedules. The Fetcher proof above is written for the logical fixed-schedule Fetcher. The implementation optimiza-tions from Section 5.2.2 preserve this claim because they are public refinements of the same schedule. O1 defers dummy-payload mate-rialization but, before any candidate-slot scan, restores fixed-size 

Neuron-Buffer s for every OHT slot that can be scanned, including padding dummy slots. O2 partitions public OHT-bin work across threads according to public scheduler metadata; the proof treats this as a public per-worker schedule, not an arbitrary OS-chosen inter-leaving. O3 reuses the feedforward OHT layout only through obliv-ious sorting or fixed scans, not through direct secret-dependent indexing. Thus these optimizations add only public scheduling metadata and do not change the simulator’s input beyond 𝑃 .

## E.10 Security of One Batch Step 

A batch step is one execution of Neuron Requester, Neuron Fetcher in Read mode, Neuron Updater, and Neuron Fetcher in Write mode on one training batch. The current internal structures of a batch step are the current LSH table, dense layer 0, and the optimizer values stored in their neuron records. For readability, the displayed batch functionality writes only the LSH-table input/output; dense layer 0 is carried as implicit state across batch steps and updated by Fupd .

Functionality Fbatch                                                        

> LSH ′
> ℓ← F batch (ℓ, {𝑞 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1,{𝑌 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1,{x𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1,LSH ℓ, 𝑃 ):1: ReqArray ℓ← F req (ℓ, {𝑞 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1, 𝑃 ).2: ReqArray ℓ,LSH ℓ← F fetch (ReqArray ℓ,LSH ℓ,Read , 𝑃 ).3: Allocate fresh ActiveNodes and ActiveVals of the public sizes fixed by 𝑃 .4: ReqArray ℓ← F upd (ReqArray ℓ,ActiveNodes ,ActiveVals ,
> {𝑌 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1,{x𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1, 𝑃 ).5: ReqArray ℓ,LSH ′
> ℓ← F fetch (ReqArray ℓ,LSH ℓ,Write , 𝑃 ).6: return LSH ′
> ℓ.

Figure 22: Ideal functionality for one batch step. Protocol 𝜋 batch 

LSH ′ 

> ℓ

← 𝜋 batch (ℓ, {𝑞 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1, {𝑌 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1, {x𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1, LSH ℓ , 𝑃 ):1: Call Freq exactly as in Figure 22, step 1. 2: Call Ffetch in Read mode exactly as in Figure 22, step 2. 3: Allocate fresh ActiveNodes and ActiveVals of the public sizes fixed by 𝑃 .4: Call Fupd exactly as in Figure 22, step 4. 5: Call Ffetch in Write mode exactly as in Figure 22, step 5. 6: return LSH ′ 

> ℓ

.

Figure 23: One batch step in the component hybrid model. Simulator Sbatch (𝑃 )

dLSH ′ 

> ℓ

← S batch (𝑃 ):0: Generate dummy batch inputs { ˆ𝑞 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1,dummy labels { ˆ𝑌 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1, and dummy features { ˆx𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1

of the same public shapes as the real batch. Generate a dummy current LSH table dLSH ℓ

with the same public shape as the real current LSH table. 1: Call Freq , Ffetch in Read mode, Fupd , and 

Ffetch in Write mode in the same order as 𝜋 batch .2: return dLSH ′ 

> ℓ

.

Figure 24: Simulator for one batch step. Theorem 6 (Hybrid-model security of one batch step) . Protocol 

𝜋 batch securely realizes Fbatch in the (F req , Ffetch , Fupd )-hybrid model. 

Proof. The protocol and the simulator make the same four component calls in the same order. The only work done outside these four calls is the allocation of ActiveNodes and ActiveVals ,whose sizes are fixed by the public parameters. The simulator uses dummy inputs, a dummy current LSH table, and dummy dense layer 0 state of the same public shapes as the real ones. By the definitions of Freq , Ffetch , and Fupd , each call reveals only the fixed public call schedule and returns an object of the same public shape. Hence the trace of 𝜋 batch is computationally indistinguishable from the trace produced by Sbatch (𝑃 ). □

Theorem 7 (Concrete security of one batch step) . Assume the premise of Corollary 1. Then the concrete batch protocol 𝜋 𝜋 req ,𝜋 fetch ,𝜋 upd 

> batch

obtained by replacing the four component calls in 𝜋 Freq ,Ffetch ,Fupd  

> batch

with 

𝜋 req , 𝜋 fetch , 𝜋 upd , and 𝜋 fetch securely realizes Fbatch .

Proof. Define hybrids 𝐻 0, 𝐻 1, 𝐻 2, 𝐻 3, 𝐻 4. In 𝐻 0, all four com-ponent calls are functionalities, so 𝐻 0 is exactly 𝜋 Freq ,Ffetch ,Fupd  

> batch

.In 𝐻 1, replace only the first call, namely Freq , by 𝜋 req , which is 

𝜋 𝜋 req ,Ffetch ,Fupd  

> batch

. In 𝐻 2, also replace the Read call to Ffetch by 𝜋 fetch ,which is 𝜋 𝜋 req ,𝜋 fetch ,Fupd  

> batch

. In 𝐻 3, also replace Fupd by 𝜋 upd , which is 

𝜋 𝜋 req ,𝜋 fetch ,𝜋 upd  

> batch

. In 𝐻 4, also replace the Write call to Ffetch by 𝜋 fetch .Thus 𝐻 4 is the concrete protocol 𝜋 𝜋 req ,𝜋 fetch ,𝜋 upd  

> batch

.Suppose some adjacent pair 𝐻 𝑗 −1 and 𝐻 𝑗 can be distinguished with non-negligible advantage. We build an adversary against the concrete security of the component replaced at step 𝑗 . That adver-sary runs the full batch step internally. For the first 𝑗 − 1 component calls it uses the real component protocols. For the last 4 − 𝑗 com-ponent calls it uses the component functionalities. For the 𝑗 -th component call it forwards the inputs of that call to its challenge oracle. If the oracle is the functionality, the internal execution is distributed exactly as 𝐻 𝑗 −1. If the oracle is the real component pro-tocol, the internal execution is distributed exactly as 𝐻 𝑗 . Hence, any distinguisher for 𝐻 𝑗 −1 and 𝐻 𝑗 can be used to build an adversary for the security of that component, which contradicts Corollary 1. Thus, every adjacent pair is computationally indistinguishable. By chaining the four pairs, 𝐻 0 ≈𝑐 𝐻 4. Together with Theorem 6, this proves the theorem. □

## E.11 Security of the Full Training Protocol 

We now prove the top-level statement. The full training protocol follows a public event schedule: one initial LSH construction event, a public-length sequence of batch steps, and periodic LSH refresh events at public batch indices determined by 𝑃 . Let 𝑁 batch be the total number of batch steps, which is determined by the public training configuration in 𝑃 . Let 𝑁 event be the total number of public initialization, batch, and refresh events. At the end of the last batch step, the trained model 𝑀 is read from the final internal structures and returned to the User. The Hypervisor still sees only the trace. 

Theorem 8 (Security of TENNOR ). Assume the premise of Corollary 1. Also assume that LSH initialization and refresh satisfy the fixed-schedule capacity contract of Appendix C.6: PADSIZE is chosen so that no real neuron overflows during the executions covered by the theorem, and any dataset-dependent selection rule for PADSIZE is included in 𝑃 . Then, for the two-layer TENNOR architecture formalized above, protocol 𝜋 TENNOR securely realizes Ftrain in the sense of Definition 2. 

Proof. Define hybrids 𝐺 0, 𝐺 1, . . . , 𝐺 𝑁 event over the public event schedule. In 𝐺 𝑡 , the first 𝑡 events are concrete events, and the re-maining 𝑁 event − 𝑡 events are simulated events driven by dummy state of the same public shape. Batch events use the concrete pro-tocol 𝜋 batch or the ideal functionality Fbatch as above. Initialization and refresh events use the fixed-schedule LSH construction and refresh procedure of Appendix C.6, or the corresponding dummy execution with the same public table sizes, WTA/LSH parameters, padding parameter, and write-back schedule. Thus 𝐺 0 is the fully simulated training loop, and 𝐺 𝑁 event is the real execution of 𝜋 TENNOR .Fix any 𝑡 ∈ [ 1..𝑁 event ]. The only difference between 𝐺 𝑡 −1 and 𝐺 𝑡 

is the 𝑡 -th public event. All earlier events are identical in the hybrids, so they produce the same public LSH-table shape before event 𝑡 . All later events use the same public schedule on state with the same public shape, so their traces are identical. If event 𝑡 is a batch step, any distinguisher gives a distinguisher for one batch step, contra-dicting Theorem 7. If event 𝑡 is initialization or refresh, the trace is fixed by public parameters: the procedure flattens public-shape tables, appends the public dummy reservoir during initialization, recomputes WTA signatures using fixed loops, invokes oblivious sorting and capacity enforcement on public-size arrays, and writes back a fixed number of entries. The dummy execution follows the same public schedule, so the two traces are indistinguishable. Hence every adjacent pair 𝐺 𝑡 −1 and 𝐺 𝑡 is computationally indistinguish-able. By chaining these pairs, 𝐺 0 ≈𝑐 𝐺 𝑁 event .In 𝐺 0, the simulator sees only 𝑃 and produces a trace by run-ning the dummy initialization, batch-step, and refresh simulations according to the public event schedule. In 𝐺 𝑁 event , the Hypervisor sees the real trace of 𝜋 TENNOR . The hybrid argument concerns only the Hypervisor’s visible trace. The model returned to the User is handled separately by correctness. In the ideal world, the output model is produced by Ftrain , while in the real world it is produced by the execution of 𝜋 TENNOR . By correctness, the honest-party output of 𝜋 TENNOR matches the output specified by Ftrain . Thus, the only part that needs simulation is the Hypervisor’s trace. We conclude 

S( 𝑃 ) ≈𝑐 

view 𝜋 TENNOR  

> H

(𝑃, 𝐷 ) ,

which is exactly Definition 2. □