Title: Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification via knowledge distillation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.06796v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 00:11:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
> Knowledge and Information Systems (2026) 68:215 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-026-02818-x
> R E S E A R C H

# Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification via knowledge distillation 

Javidan Abdullayev 1 · Maxime Devanne 1 · Jonathan Weber 1 · Germain Forestier 1,2 

> Received: 27 February 2025 / Revised: 10 May 2026 / Accepted: 1 June 2026 © The Author(s) 2026

Abstract 

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various domains including time series analysis, computer vision and natural language processing. However, high computational and memory demands of state-of-the-art architectures pose challenges for deployment in resource-limited environments. Knowledge Distillation (KD) addresses this by transferring knowledge from a large teacher model to a smaller, more efficient student model while maintaining competitive performance. In this work, we investigate the effectiveness of KD for Time Series Classification (TSC) across three architectures: the classical Fully Convolutional Network (FCN), the convolutional Inception model and the transformer-based ConvTran 

model. We evaluate our approach on UCR Archive, the largest benchmark repository of time series datasets, by modifying architectural components such as convolutional filters, Inception modules and attention heads across the three architectures. Our results consistently show that KD most effectively benefits student models of intermediate complexity across all three architectures, with the distilled FCN student reducing parameters by a factor of 38, the distilled Inception student achieving nearly the same performance as the teacher with 42% fewer parameters and the distilled ConvTran student with 2 attention heads showing the most significant improvement through distillation. To encourage further research and reproducibility, we provide our implementation at https://github.com/MSD-IRIMAS/KD-4-TSC. 

Keywords Time series classification · Model compression · Knowledge distillation · Deep neural networks · InceptionTime · FCN · ConvTran Maxime Devanne, Jonathan Weber and Germain Forestier have contributed equally to this work. 

# B Javidan Abdullayev javidan.abdullayev@uha.fr Maxime Devanne maxime.devanne@uha.fr Jonathan Weber jonathan.weber@uha.fr Germain Forestier germain.forestier@uha.fr 1 IRIMAS, University of Haute Alsace, Frères Lumière, Mulhouse 68200, France 2 Faculty of IT, Monash University, Wellington Road, Melbourne 3800, Australia  

> 0123456789().: V,-vol

# 123 215 Page 2 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

## 1 Introduction 

Deep learning has fundamentally transformed time series analysis, enabling automatic fea-ture extraction directly from raw data without the need for manual feature engineering [20]. A significant amount of time series data has recently been exploited for various applications such as human motion [11], satellite imagery [8] and healthcare [33]. The growing volume of time series data and having the same topology as image data with one less dimension [5] led researchers to investigate deep learning approaches in time series analysis. Recently, time series classification (TSC) has emerged as one of the most active research topics with applications across a wide range of fields [28, 50]. Many of the well-performed TSC methods excluding those based on deep learning involve feature engineering as a separate task prior to classification. Those approaches normally result in information loss and complicate the development process. In contrast, deep learning models perform feature engineering automat-ically as part of the learning process and remove the need for manual feature engineering. Consequently, they can extract information faster, more directly and completely from the given time series data. In this work, we focus on the task of TSC, exploring deep neural network architectures ranging from convolutional to transformer-based models [12, 20]. Empirically, neural networks tend to perform better as their complexity grows which has led to increasingly complex state-of-the-art deep learning models for TSC. One significant drawback of such complex DNNs is the difficulty of deploying them in real-world envi-ronments. Deploying very deep neural networks in real-time applications or on embedded devices with limited resources is challenging due to their substantial computational and memory requirements. To enhance efficiency while maintaining high performance, recent works have focused on knowledge distillation (KD), one of the most prominent model compression techniques. KD involves transferring knowledge from a deep pre-trained model to a shallower model which aims to replicate the outputs of the larger model. In this context, a deeper model is commonly referred to as a teacher model and a shallower model as a student model. [7] initially proposed this concept to transfer knowledge from a larger network to a smaller network without causing a significant loss in performance. Later [17] proposed a variation in this method which became known as knowledge distillation . Findings in these papers convincingly demonstrate that a shallower model can achieve competitive or superior performance in comparison with a very deep model. With the development of deeper neural network architectures, the success of knowledge distillation has been validated across various fields of artificial intelligence, including com-puter vision [14], text recognition [42] and natural language processing [15]. Only a small number of papers have investigated knowledge distillation in the field of TSC. [1] explored the impact of knowledge distillation using the classical FCN architecture for TSC. Another work [13] improved the performance of a student model by rectifying the incorrectly predicted soft labels from the teacher Inception model. Recent advances in large-scale knowledge dis-tillation have further demonstrated its potential in improving model efficiency while retaining high performance, most notably in transformer-based models such as DeepSeek [16]. In our previous study [1], we investigated knowledge distillation exclusively for the FCN architecture, focusing on reducing its convolutional filters. In this paper, we sig-nificantly extend our study along two directions. First, we incorporate two additional architectures, namely the convolutional Inception model [21] and the transformer-based ConvTran model [12], analyzing effects of KD on Inception modules and attention heads, respectively. Second, we provide a deeper analysis of the distillation process by examining 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 3 of 24 215       

> Fig. 1 Accuracy plot shows performances of the student ,studentAlone (vanilla student) and teacher models for FCN, Inception and ConvTran networks on the Haptics dataset

filter space transfer between teacher and student models and investigating how KD affects generalization behavior. Figure 1 depicts an accuracy plot for the performances of teacher , student and studen-tAlone (vanilla student) models in the case of FCN [41], Inception [21] and ConvTran [12] architectures on the Haptics dataset. The studentAlone model represents the same network as the student model trained without knowledge distillation. The Haptics dataset from the UCR Archive contains time series data representing tactile sensor responses, used for classifying different types of interactions in haptic-based systems. The use of knowledge distillation for TSC is evaluated on the UCR Archive 2018 [9], the largest available repository of time series datasets. Experiments show that knowledge distillation is especially beneficial for student 

models of intermediate complexity. The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows: The related work is introduced in Sect. 2. Next, we provide detailed background information about TSC, knowledge distillation and teacher–student model configurations in Sect. 3. All experiments and results are discussed in Sect. 4. Finally, the conclusion is given in Sect. 5. 

## 2 Related work 

2.1 Knowledge distillation 

Knowledge distillation (KD) is a technique to transfer knowledge from a deep model or an ensemble of models to a smaller, shallower model. This concept was initially introduced by [7]. They suggested that minimizing the divergence between the output logits of teacher 

# 123 215 Page 4 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

and student models allows the student to mimic the teacher predictions. Consequently, the distilled student network achieves competitive performance despite having fewer parameters. Building on this concept, [17] proposed training the student model using output of the Softmax function so that the Softmax outputs of the student and teacher models are similar. They also introduced a temperature parameter to soften probability distributions which helps the teacher model transfer its generalization capabilities to the student model more effec-tively. This technique was further extended in [34] by suggesting the use of feature maps of intermediate layers as hints to enhance the performance of the student model. Similarly, [48] considered intermediate representations while [31] incorporated metric learning into knowl-edge distillation through a triplet loss function. An alternative approach, the teacher assistant method, was introduced in [29] where a model of intermediate complexity bridges the gap between a shallower student and a deeper teacher model. Although knowledge distillation has been applied primarily in computer vision [14, 44], its promising results have inspired research in various other fields, including document analysis [36], speech processing [38] and natural language processing [37]. In the domain of time series analysis, a small number of studies have explored the use of knowledge distillation for tasks such as regression [43], forecasting [18] and classification [1, 13]. More recently, knowledge distillation has been scaled to large language models to improve efficiency and scalability [16, 45]. We note that recent research has proposed lightweight architectures for time series fore-casting such as DLinear [49] and FITS [46] which reduce model complexity using linear modeling and frequency-domain representations. However, these forecasting-oriented mod-els fall outside the scope of this study. In this work, we investigate the adaptation of knowledge distillation for time series classification , focusing on its effectiveness in reducing model complexity while maintaining performance across three architectures: classical FCN, con-volutional Inception model and transformer-based ConvTran model. 

2.2 Time series classification 

Time series classification is one of the most challenging research areas in data mining [47]. Due to the significant increase in the amount of available time series data, many TSC meth-ods have been proposed in recent years [3]. One of the well-known methods for TSC is to employ 1-Nearest Neighbor (NN) with a distance function [26] which has been the sub-ject of many studies. Among distance functions, Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) has been widely considered as a strong baseline for NN-based TSC, demonstrating promising results across a wide range of datasets [3]. Building on DTW, [32] proposed a novel DTW aver-aging algorithm that improves both classification accuracy and computational efficiency. To further enhance performance, some studies have proposed DTW variants that incor-porate temporal constraints such as Time-weight-based DTW (TDTW) [24] and Adaptive constrained DTW (ACDTW) [25]. Other research efforts have focused on enhancing time series data representation with notable approaches including interpretable representations [4] and Shape-sphere [23]. A comparative study [26] evaluated several other distance functions combined with NN, showing that none of them significantly outperformed DTW. The same study also showed that ensembling individual NN classifiers with different distance measures outperforms every single component of the ensemble. To surpass the NN-DTW classifier, subsequent works focused on developing ensembles of different classifiers built on multiple time series representations [2]. These representations can be constructed in various ways, 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 5 of 24 215 

with the most notable techniques being shapelet transformers [6], DTW features [22] and time series feature learning [40]. Building on this idea, researchers proposed COTE (Collective Of Transformation-based Ensembles) [2], an ensemble of 35 classifiers built on multiple time series representations. COTE was later extended using a Hierarchical Vote system, resulting in HIVE-COTE 2.0 [27], one of the strongest performing approaches in TSC. However, these ensemble models are computationally expensive which makes them challenging to deploy in resource-limited environments. In addition to these approaches, dictionary-based methods have also been explored for TSC. A notable example is BOSS (Bag-of-SFA Symbols), introduced by [35], which uses symbolic approximations of time series combined with an ensemble classifier to achieve high accuracy, even in the presence of noise. Another work [30] introduced closed motifs for streaming time series classification, providing a new perspective on the efficient handling of continuous, real-time data. The rapid development of deep learning has also had a significant impact on TSC with numerous deep learning-based architectures proposed in recent years. A compre-hensive review by [20] compared several deep learning-based TSC architectures which provide valuable insights into their relative strengths and limitations. The results showed that convolution-based architectures, such as FCNs and ResNets, achieved state-of-the-art performance on UCR Archive datasets. InceptionTime [21] adapts the Inception architecture for TSC by employing convolutional filters of various sizes, demonstrating that multi-scale feature extraction leads to improved classification performance. ROCKET [10] addresses the long training time of deep learning-based approaches by using a large number of ran-dom convolution kernels as feature extractors combined with a Ridge regression classifier which achieves competitive performance with significantly reduced training time. A recent approach, LITETime [19], which uses depth-wise separable convolutions with boosting tech-niques, demonstrated similar performance to the state-of-the-art InceptionTime model while requiring 2.78 times less training time. Meaningful representations of time series data in latent spaces have also been explored through multitasking neural networks [39], which leads to bet-ter estimation of time series averages and improved classification performance. In addition, attention-based architectures have gained increasing interest in TSC, with ConvTran [12] being a notable example which combines convolutional and self-attention mechanisms to capture both local and global temporal dependencies. In this paper, our aim is not to develop a state-of-the-art model but rather to investigate the effectiveness of knowledge distillation for TSC across convolutional and transformer-based architectures and analyze the obtained results from different perspectives including model compression, filter space transfer and generalization behavior. 

## 3 Knowledge distillation for time series classification 

3.1 Background on deep learning for TSC 

A time series is a sequence of data points that represents the evolution of a specific quantity over equal time increments. Let t1, t2, ..., t T be timestamps then a time series can be repre-sented as a vector in this form X = [ x t1 , x t2 , x t3 , ..., x t T ], x ∈ R T , where each element in the vector represents the value of the quantity at a specific timestamp. In the case of univariate time series, each element is a scalar value, x ti ∈ R, i = 1, ..., T . In contrast, a multivariate 

# 123 215 Page 6 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

time series consists of multiple variables observed simultaneously at each timestamp where each observation is a vector x ti ∈ R M with M denoting the number of variables. In this work, we focus on univariate time series classification. The true label or hard label for a given time series example is defined as a one-hot vector 

Y = { y1, y2, ..., yC } where C represents the total number of classes. The soft label or soft target for a given time series example is defined as a vector ˆY = { ˆ y1, ˆy2, ..., ˆyC } where 

ˆY ∈ [ 0, 1] and indicates the probability that x belongs to class c ∈ { 1, 2, ..., C}. A dataset D

is a collection of pairs {(X1, Y1), ( X2, Y2), ..., ( X n , Y n )} where X i is a univariate time series and Yi is its corresponding one-hot label vector. In TSC, the primary task is to assign a correct class label to a given time series example. Therefore, the objective is to estimate a function F to map from a given input space X to an output space Y . In the context of deep learning, such a function corresponds to a Deep Neural Network (DNN) model. Since true labels are available during the training of deep learning models, the goal is to optimize the model parameters so that predicted labels ˆY match true labels Y . To evaluate performance of the mapping function, a loss function L measures the difference between the predicted and true labels. The categorical cross-entropy loss function  

> LCE

is commonly used in deep learning-based TSC tasks. As shown in [20], deep learning architectures that achieve outstanding performance in TSC include Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and more recently, transformer-based models [12]. A CNN is a type of neural network architecture that contains convolutional layers to compute 1D temporal convolutions on given time series. A convolution operation involves sliding a filter ω of size l over a time series X of size T . For an arbitrary timestamp 

t, a convolution operation C t in a convolution layer can be defined as 

C t = g(ω ∗ X t−l/2:t+l/2 + b) | ∀ t ∈ [ 1, T ], (1) where g is the activation function which is typically a nonlinear function, b is the bias term and ∗ denotes the convolution process. In addition to convolutional architectures, transformer-based models have also been applied to TSC. These models rely on self-attention mechanisms to capture global depen-dencies across the entire time series, complementing the local feature extraction capability of convolutional operations. 

3.2 Knowledge distillation for TSC 

KD is a collaborative model compression technique which helps to reduce the complexity of neural network architectures while preserving performance. The complexity of a neural network is determined by its architectural components such as the number of layers, filters and neurons. For transformer-based models, additional factors include the number of attention heads and the embedding dimension. The size of a neural network is generally considered to be the number of parameters it contains. KD involves two neural network architectures with different complexities. One is a larger, pre-trained network known as the teacher model and the other one is a smaller network, the student model. Typically, the larger network ( teacher )has more ability to fit well with a given dataset and consequently performs better than the smaller network ( student ). The essence of knowledge distillation is the transfer of knowledge from the teacher model to the student model during the training of the student model. This collaborative process allows the teacher model to guide the training of the student model, improving its performance. As a result, the distilled student model is expected to surpass 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 7 of 24 215 

> soft predictions soft labels predictions hard label y student loss total loss Student model Teacher model I nput time series distillation loss

Fig. 2 Teacher–Student FCN architecture for knowledge distillation the studentAlone (vanilla student) model and have competitive performance compared to the 

teacher model. In the context of TSC, a student model is trained using both the dataset D and the pre-dictions of a teacher model. Figure 2 illustrates the general architecture of the knowledge distillation process applied to the FCN network [41]. The figure demonstrates how the stu-dent model learns to replicate the predictions of the teacher model. This approach aims to minimize the disparity between the outputs of the student and teacher models, enhancing the student model performance by leveraging the teacher model knowledge. As illustrated in Fig. 2, an input time series is simultaneously fed to both the teacher 

and student models, propagating through each network. Subsequently, the distillation loss and student loss are calculated separately. As a student loss, we employ the cross-entropy function, the most frequently used loss function in classification problems, as defined in equation 2. 

LC E (Y, ˆYS ) = − 

> C

∑

> i=1

Yi log ( ˆYSi ) (2) where Y denotes true labels and ˆY S denotes the predicted class probabilities of the student 

model corresponding to the input. The predicted values ˆY S are actual class probabilities computed by applying the Softmax function to the output logits of the last layer of the 

student model. The formula for the Softmax function is given in Eq. 3, 

ˆYi = So f tmax (z i ) = e z i

∑Cj=1 e z j

(3) where z denotes the logit vector from the last layer. Next, the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence function is typically used to calculate the distillation loss. This method measures the diversity between two probability distributions. In the context of KD, these probability distributions are the softened predicted probabilities of the teacher and student models. The formula to calculate KL loss is given in Eq. 4. 

LK L ( ˆYτ 

> T

, ˆYτ 

> S

) = − 

> C

∑

> i=1

ˆYτ 

> Ti

log 

ˆYτ

> Ti

ˆYτ

> Si

(4) 

# 123 215 Page 8 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

where ˆY T 

> τ

and ˆY S 

> τ

denote softened predicted probabilities of the teacher and student 

models, respectively. The softened predicted probabilities are obtained by applying the Softmax function with a temperature parameter τ to the output logits of teacher and student models. The Softmax function with a temperature parameter τ is depicted in Eq. 5 

ˆYτ 

> i

= So f tmax (z i /τ ) = e z i /τ 

∑Cj=1 e z j /τ (5) where z represents the logit vector from the last layer and τ represents a temperature param-eter. As shown in Eq. 5, when τ is equal to one, it calculates the same values as the original Softmax function 3. As the value of τ increases, the predicted probability distributions for both models become smoother. The primary reason for applying the Softmax function with a temperature parameter τ is to soften the probability distributions, facilitating knowledge transfer from the teacher to the student model. The knowledge acquired from a teacher model during the training of a student model is captured in the distillation loss. The total loss is calculated as a weighted sum of the student loss and the distillation loss. The backpropagation algorithm then optimizes the parameters of the student network based on the total loss. The formula for calculating the total loss is given in Eq. 6. 

L K D = λ × L C E (Y, ˆYS ) + (1 − λ) × L K L ( ˆYτ 

> T

, ˆYτ 

> S

) (6) where Y , ˆY S , ˆY τ 

> T

and ˆY τ 

> S

represent hard predictions, standard student predictions (output of Softmax function), softened teacher predictions with a temperature value τ and softened 

student predictions with the same temperature value τ , respectively. The parameter λ is used to adjust the relative impact of the student and distillation losses in the total loss function. 

3.3 Teacher models 

As previously mentioned, deep learning architectures including convolutional and transformer-based models have demonstrated state-of-the-art results for Time Series Classification (TSC) [12, 20]. For our experiments, we selected three such architectures: FCN [41], Incep-tion [21] and ConvTran [12]. The rationale for choosing these three architectures is to evaluate the effectiveness of knowledge distillation across models of varying complexity and design paradigms, from a relatively lightweight convolutional architecture (FCN) to a more complex convolutional model (Inception) and a transformer-based model (ConvTran). Our primary objective is to analyze the impact of knowledge distillation by reducing the number of con-volutional filters in the FCN architecture, the number of Inception modules in the Inception architecture and the number of attention heads and embedding dimensions in the ConvTran architecture. 

3.3.1 FCN network 

The teacher FCN model, first proposed in [41], consists of three convolutional blocks. Each block includes three operations: 1D convolution, batch normalization and ReLU activation. An input time series first undergoes a 1D convolution operation, followed by batch normaliza-tion and then passes through a ReLU activation. In all convolutional blocks, 1D convolutions have a stride of 1 and zero padding to preserve the length of the input time series after the 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 9 of 24 215  

> Fig. 3 Teacher–Student inception architecture for knowledge distillation

convolution operation. The first convolutional block has 128 filters of size 8, followed by a second block with 256 filters of size 5 and the third block contains 128 filters of size 3. The output of the last convolutional block is averaged over the temporal dimension using a Global Average Pooling (GAP) layer and the result is then fed into the Softmax classifier. The teacher FCN architecture comprises 267,018 model parameters as shown in Fig. 2 and summarized in Table 1. 

3.3.2 Inception network 

The teacher Inception model was first introduced in [21], and its overall architecture is depicted in Fig. 3. As shown in the figure, the teacher Inception network includes two residual blocks. Each residual block comprises three Inception modules. Each Inception module has three convolutional branches with kernel sizes of 10, 20 and 40, along with a pooling branch to capture features at various scales and resolutions. The output of an Inception module is created by concatenating the outputs of all its branches along the depth dimension. The input to each residual block is added to its output using a skip linear connection. After the final Inception module, a Global Average Pooling (GAP) layer is applied to reduce the spatial dimensions of the output multivariate time series. Finally, a Softmax activation function is applied to transform logits of the model into a class probability distribution. The architecture of the teacher Inception model includes 420,708 model parameters, as summarized in Table 2. 

3.3.3 ConvTran network 

The teacher ConvTran model, introduced in [12], combines convolutional and self-attention mechanisms for TSC. The detailed architecture of ConvTran is described in [12]. The original ConvTran architecture was designed for multivariate time series classification where the embedding layer consists of two convolutional operations: a temporal convolution to capture local temporal patterns and a spatial convolution to capture dependencies among channels. Since we evaluate on univariate time series datasets from the UCR Archive, we remove the spatial convolution from the embedding layer and retain only the temporal convolution. The output of the embedding layer is then passed through a transformer encoder that uses multi-head self-attention to capture global temporal dependencies. The teacher ConvTran model uses 8 attention heads with an embedding dimension of 16, comprising 33,026 model parameters as summarized in Table 3. 

# 123 215 Page 10 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al.                                                        

> Table 1 Configurations of teacher FCN and student FCN architectures Model # filters # filters # filters Total name layer 1 layer 2 layer 3 # parameters Teacher Model_F128 128 256 128 267 018 Students Model_64F 64 128 64 67 978 Model_F32 32 64 32 17 610 Model_F28 28 56 28 13 618 Model_F24 24 48 24 10 138 Model_F20 20 40 20 7 170 Model_F16 16 32 16 4 714 Model_F12 12 24 12 2 770 Model_F8 816 81 338 Model_F4 484418

3.4 Student models 

To achieve successful knowledge distillation, designing appropriate student architectures is crucial. The literature presents various methods for creating suitable student models for a specific teacher network. For effective knowledge transfer, it is always recommended to make the student architecture similar to the teacher architecture with fewer layers or fewer filters in each layer [14]. As discussed earlier, our goal is to evaluate the performance of knowledge distillation by reducing the number of convolutional filters in the FCN architecture, the number of Inception modules in the Inception architecture and the number of attention heads and embedding dimensions in the ConvTran architecture. This means that all designed student 

networks are essentially quantized versions of their corresponding teacher networks. 

3.4.1 Student FCN models 

To evaluate the impact of convolutional filters, we constructed student FCN models with three layers, each having fewer convolutional filters than the teacher FCN model. Table 1 summarizes all the details about the designed student architectures, which are denoted as Model_#F in the table. 

3.4.2 Student inception models 

To assess the impact of convolutional layers, we construct student Inception models with fewer inception modules. Each designed student model has the same number of convolutional filters as the teacher Inception model and is denoted as Model_#M. Table 2 summarizes detailed information on all student Inception model configurations. 

3.4.3 Student ConvTran models 

To assess the impact of attention heads and embedding dimensions, we construct student Con-vTran models by simultaneously reducing both components. Each designed student model is denoted as Model_#H. Table 3 summarizes detailed information on all student ConvTran model configurations. 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 11 of 24 215                                                 

> Table 2 Configurations of teacher Inception and student Inception architectures Model name # Inception modules Total param. # Teacher Model_6M 6422 627 Students Model_5M 5325 347 Model_4M 4244 963 Model_3M 3164 579 Model_2M 283 555 Model_1M 13 171
> Table 3 Configurations of teacher ConvTran and student ConvTran architectures Model name # Attention Embedding Total heads dimension param. # Teacher Model_8H 816 33 026 Students Model_6H 612 24 692 Model_4H 4816 434 Model_2H 248 312 Model_1H 124 277

## 4 Experimental evaluation 

4.1 Experimental setup 

4.1.1 Data 

For all our experiments, we use the UCR Archive datasets to assess the impact of knowledge distillation for TSC. This archive is the largest available repository of time series datasets and contains 128 univariate time series datasets from various domains and sensors, each with distinct characteristics such as time series length and number of samples. The number of classes in these datasets ranges from 2 to 60. We adopt the original train/test split and apply z-normalization to all time series for a fair evaluation comparable to the state-of-the-art. Following standard practices for fair comparison, we discard datasets with unequal length series or missing values and the Fungi dataset, which only provides a single training case for each class label. Consequently, we consider 112 univariate time series datasets in our experiments. 

4.1.2 Experimental protocol 

In our knowledge distillation framework, we begin by training the teacher models ( teacher 

FCN, teacher Inception and teacher ConvTran) five times for each dataset. From these results, we select the best teacher model based on the lowest training loss value, ensuring reproducibility in practical applications. This best teacher model is then used to guide the training of the student model as described in Sect. 3. We propose different student models by reducing the number of convolutional filters, Inception modules and attention heads with embedding dimensions from the teacher FCN, teacher Inception and teacher ConvTran 

# 123 215 Page 12 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

architectures, respectively. In parallel to the distilled student models, we also train the same 

student models without applying knowledge distillation, referred to as studentAlone models. First, we compare the student and studentAlone models to assess the impact of knowledge distillation. Next, we compare the student models with the teacher model to evaluate how well the students perform relative to the teacher . To reduce dependence on random initialization, we train both student and studentAlone models five times. Finally, for each dataset, we compare performance of each model by averaging the accuracy across five runs. 

4.1.3 Comparison protocol and metrics 

Each student model performance is compared first with the studentAlone model and then with the teacher model across 112 UCR Archive datasets. For that reason, we take into account the number of datasets where a specific model wins, i.e., performs better than another model in terms of classification accuracy. Additionally, we account for the number of datasets in which performance results in ties and losses. 

4.2 Hyperparameters in knowledge distillation 

Knowledge distillation involves two hyperparameters, namely the distillation weight λ and the temperature τ . As shown in Eq. 6, λ controls the trade-off between the supervised student loss and the distillation loss while τ softens the output distributions of both teacher and 

student in the KL term. We set λ = 0.5 to assign equal weight to both the student loss and the distillation loss and τ = 10 following the standard setting widely adopted in the KD literature [17]. By using fixed hyperparameters across all datasets and architectures, we avoid the risk of overfitting to the test set through hyperparameter selection. 

4.2.1 Implementation details 

The teacher FCN, Inception and ConvTran models were implemented following the origi-nal configurations described in [41], [21] and [12], respectively. For each architecture, we separately analyze impact of knowledge distillation by reducing the complexity of student 

models. PyTorch is the main framework in our implementation which is used to build all 

teacher , student and studentAlone models. All models are trained using the Adam optimiza-tion algorithm with a batch size of 16, 64 and 64 for the FCN, Inception and ConvTran models, respectively. Additionally, we utilize a learning rate scheduling mechanism that dynamically reduces the learning rate based on performance with a reduction factor of 0.5, a patience value of 50 epochs and a minimum learning rate of 0.001. All experiments were conducted on a system equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPU (32GB memory), run-ning Ubuntu 22.04, with Python 3.12 and PyTorch 2.5.1. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/MSD-IRIMAS/KD-4-TSC. 

4.3 Experimental results 

4.3.1 Performance comparison of student FCN models 

To evaluate the impact of convolutional filters in our KD framework, we analyze their effect on the performance of student FCN models by comparing student models with studentAlone 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 13 of 24 215 

> Model_F64 Model_F32 Model_F28 Model_F24 Model_F20 Model_F16 Model_F12 Model_F8 Model_F4 Student models 020 40 60 80 Number of wins student studentAlone

(a) student vs studentAlone 

> Model_F64 Model_F32 Model_F28 Model_F24 Model_F20 Model_F16 Model_F12 Model_F8 Model_F4 Student models 020 40 60 80 Number of wins student teacher

(b) student vs teacher 

Fig. 4 Number of wins considering classification accuracies according to various numbers of student FCN models filters models. As illustrated in Fig. 4a, we assess the number of wins for each model. When the number of filters is high, the performance of studentAlone models surpasses that of distilled student models. With an intermediate number of convolutional filters, the distilled student 

models effectively leverage the knowledge of the teacher model, achieving superior per-formance compared to studentAlone models. However, when the number of filters is low, knowledge distillation results in suboptimal performance as the distilled student models deteriorate. These findings provide deeper insights into how the number of convolutional filters influences the performance of different student models within the KD framework. Hence, the most effective student FCN configuration utilizing KD is the architecture that consists of 20 filters in the first and third layers and 40 filters in the second layer. For this specific configuration, Fig. 5 presents the accuracy plot of the student model compared to the 

studentAlone model across the 112 UCR datasets. An interesting observation from Fig. 5 is the asymmetry in win magnitudes. When the 

student model wins, improvements are typically modest (points near the diagonal), whereas 

studentAlone achieves a few substantial wins (points far from the diagonal). This asymmetry occurs because KD acts as a regularization mechanism that prevents extreme failures but also limits exceptional gains by guiding the student toward performance level of the teacher . In contrast, the studentAlone can achieve larger improvements on datasets where the architecture is naturally well-suited. Additionally, our fixed hyperparameters may not be optimal for all datasets in diverse UCR Archive which potentially limits the effectiveness of KD in such cases. Next, we compare the performance of the distilled student models with the teacher model. The number of wins for each model is illustrated in Fig. 4b. These results reveal trends similar to those observed earlier. The distilled student models with an intermediate number of filters exhibit competitive performance with the teacher model. Moreover, the student_8F model surpasses the teacher model in approximately one-third of the datasets, despite having fewer than 1% of the teacher model parameters. 

4.3.2 Performance comparison of student inception models 

In this section, we analyze the impact of inception modules on the student Inception models. For this purpose, we primarily focus on comparing the performance of the distilled student 

# 123 215 Page 14 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

StudentAlone Model_20F Student Model_20F 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.0 0.0 Win / Tie / Loss 64 / 6 / 42 student is better here studentAlone is better here 

Fig. 5 Accuracy plot shows performance of student_20F model against to studentAlone_20F FCN model      

> Model_5M Model_4M Model_3M Model_2M Model_1M 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Student StudentAlone Student models Number of wins

(a) student vs studentAlone      

> Number of wins Student models 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Student Teacher Model_5M Model_4M Model_3M Model_2M Model_1M

(b) student vs teacher 

Fig. 6 Number of wins considering classification accuracy according to various numbers of Inception modules of student models models against the studentAlone models. The number of wins for each model is depicted in Fig. 6a. The results show that when the number of Inception modules is high, in this case 5, KD slightly degrades the performance of the distilled student_5M model. Reducing the number of inception modules to 4 significantly boosts the performance of the distilled student_4M model through KD. Finally, for the relatively smaller number of inception modules, student_3M ,

student_2M and student_1M models, KD degrades the performance of the distilled student 

models. Hence, the best distilled student Inception network leveraging KD is the student_4M 

Inception architecture which has 16 more wins over the studentAlone_4M Inception model. The student_4M Inception model has two more wins over the teacher Inception model. Considering that the student_4M Inception model contains 42% fewer parameters than the 

teacher Inception model, it can be regarded as a very promising architecture to replace the 

teacher Inception model. Figure 7, depicts the accuracy plot of the student_4M Inception model against the teacher Inception model for each of the 112 UCR archive datasets. From the figure, we can notice that the student_4M model nearly achieves the same performance as the teacher model while requiring less training and inference time. 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 15 of 24 215 

> 0.2 Student_4M

Teacher Student is better here Teacher TTis better here Win / Tie / Loss 50 / 14 / 48 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0     

> Fig. 7 Accuracy plot shows performance of the student_4M with 42% less parameters against to the teacher

Lastly, we analyze the performance of the student Inception models in comparison with the 

teacher Inception model. Figure 6b presents the number of wins for each model. The results indicate that the student_5M and student_4M models achieve performance comparable to the 

teacher model. Additionally, the teacher model significantly outperforms the student models with one or two Inception modules. However, as shown in Fig. 6b 

4.3.3 Performance comparison of student ConvTran models 

In this section, we analyze the impact of reducing the number of attention heads and embed-ding dimensions on the student ConvTran models. We first compare the performance of the distilled student models against the studentAlone models. The number of wins for each model is depicted in Fig. 8a. The results show that KD improves the performance of the distilled 

student ConvTran models for smaller configurations. The most significant improvement is observed for the student_2H model which achieves 62 wins against 42 wins for the studen-tAlone_2H model. As the number of attention heads and embedding dimension increase, the gap between student and studentAlone models narrows, with both achieving nearly equal performance at 6 attention heads. Hence, the best distilled student ConvTran model leveraging KD is the student_2H archi-tecture with 2 attention heads and embedding dimension 4, which has 20 more wins over the 

studentAlone_2H model. For this specific configuration, Fig. 9 presents the accuracy plot of the student_2H model compared to the studentAlone_2H model across the 112 UCR datasets. The student_2H model wins on 62 datasets against the studentAlone_2H model, confirming that KD provides a substantial performance improvement for the ConvTran architecture at this complexity level. Next, we compare the performance of the distilled student models with the teacher model. The number of wins for each model is illustrated in Fig. 8b. The results indicate that as the number of attention heads and embedding dimension increase, the student models achieve increasingly competitive performance against the teacher model. The student_6H model surpasses the teacher model on 57 out of 112 datasets. However, as shown in Fig. 8a, the gap between the student_6H and studentAlone_6H models is negligible, indicating that KD 

# 123 215 Page 16 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

(a) student vs studentAlone (b) student vs teacher         

> Fig. 8 Number of wins considering classification accuracy according to various numbers of attention heads and embedding dimensions of student ConvTran models
> Win /Tie / Loss 62 / 8 / 42 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

StudentAlone_2H 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Student_2H Student is better here StudentAlone is better here      

> Fig. 9 Accuracy plot shows performance of the student_2H model against the studentAlone_2H ConvTran model

provides minimal additional benefit at this complexity level. This is consistent with the behavior observed in both FCN and Inception architectures, where student models close to the teacher in terms of model size do not significantly benefit from KD. At the other end, the 

student_1H model fails to compete with the teacher model, with the teacher winning on 105 out of 112 datasets. Therefore, the most meaningful contribution of KD for the ConvTran architecture is observed for intermediate student configurations, particularly the student_2H 

model where KD provides a substantial performance boost over the studentAlone model. 

4.4 Experimental analysis 

4.4.1 Relationship between KD and model complexity 

Across all three architectures, in the case of more complex student models, KD degrades the performance of the distilled student models. This behavior can be explained by the fact 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 17 of 24 215 

that complex student models are close to the teacher model in terms of model size, allowing them to capture distinctive features independently and achieve highly competitive results with the teacher model. Therefore, forcing the complex distilled student models to mimic the teacher model prevents them from learning novel representations that could improve performance. Next, in the case of intermediate complexity student models, KD helps to boost the performance of the distilled student models across all three architectures. This can be explained by the fact that the complexity of these student models is large enough to capture and leverage knowledge from a complex teacher model. Hence, KD enhances their ability to generalize better by learning from the teacher distilled knowledge. Finally, in the case of less complex student models, KD degrades the performance of the distilled student models for both FCN and Inception architectures. As shown in [29], a smaller student network may lack the capacity to utilize the knowledge of a larger teacher network which may explain the performance degradation in the smaller distilled student models. However, for the ConvTran architecture, KD continues to improve the performance of even the smallest student_1H 

model, suggesting that the self-attention mechanism may be more receptive to knowledge transfer than purely convolutional architectures at lower model capacities. From Figs. 4b and 6b, we observe that smaller student models achieve a considerable num-ber of wins over their respective teacher models across the UCR Archive datasets. Specifically, the smaller student FCN models ( student_12F and student_8F ) outperform the teacher FCN model on more than 28 out of 112 datasets while the student_2M Inception model surpasses the teacher Inception model on 27 out of 112 datasets. These results demonstrate that smaller student models, except for very small configurations, achieve higher accuracy than the teacher model on roughly one-fourth of the UCR Archive datasets. This can be explained by the fact that smaller student models have significantly smaller receptive fields which makes them less prone to overfitting on smaller datasets. From another point of view, this also shows large variability in the UCR Archive where it is not possible to identify a particular architecture with a certain number of layers and filters that performs well on all datasets. 

4.4.2 Relationship between KD and filter transfer 

This subsection aims to visually analyze convolutional filters of the teacher Inception, stu-dent Inception and studentAlone Inception models to comprehend the real impact of KD on the Inception network. As we mentioned, the original Inception model consists of six Inception modules, each containing four convolutional filters of sizes 40, 20, 10 and 1. In our experiments, we visualize the convolutional filters from the first inception module for the EOGVerticalSignal dataset. From the first inception module, we selected the filter with size 40 because it is the longest filter that can represent learned parameters in a better way than the others. In our experiments, we use the default settings from the original InceptionTime 

paper [21], so the number of filters is 32. Consequently, the convolutional filter shape for the model is 32 x 40. We use the DTW distance measure to compute the distance between each pair of filters and then, by utilizing the T-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (T-SNE) technique, we project them into a two-dimensional coordinate system. The T-SNE technique transforms the filters into a 32 x 2 matrix which can be easily visualized in a Cartesian coordinate system. The student_4M , studentAlone_4M , and teacher Inception models achieved accuracy scores of 0.483, 0.447 and 0.477, respectively, on the EOGVerticalSignal dataset. Since the performance of the student model is closer to that of the teacher model, we initially expected its convolutional filter distribution to more closely resemble that of the teacher 

# 123 215 Page 18 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

> Teacher StudentAlone

(a) studentAlone and teacher 

> Teacher Student

(b) student and teacher  

> Fig. 10 Visualization of trained filters on EOGVerticalSignal dataset

model rather than the studentAlone model. To explore this, we first compare the convolu-tional filters of the teacher and studentAlone models. Figure 10a visualizes the convolutional filters from the first Inception module of both models, where purple and orange points repre-sent the studentAlone and teacher models, respectively. The plot reveals that the distribution of studentAlone convolutional filters (purple points) generally differs from that of the teacher 

filters (orange points). For instance, the purple circle highlights a region where the studen-tAlone filters exhibit a distinct pattern compared to the teacher filters. Additionally, within the orange dotted line, a small number of purple points indicate minimal overlap. This varia-tion in distribution suggests that the teacher and studentAlone models generalize differently, which may explain the observed performance differences despite our initial expectations. Next, we conducted the same experiments for the teacher and student models. Figure 10b visualizes the convolutional filters of both models, where orange and green points repre-sent the teacher and student models, respectively. The figure shows that these points are distributed more compactly, indicating a greater similarity between the student and teacher 

filters compared to the studentAlone filters. Additionally, the small green circle highlights a few student filters that exhibit different patterns from those in the teacher model, suggest-ing that while the student model closely follows the teacher , it still captures some distinct features. The aim of KD is to let the student model mimic the predictions of the teacher model. As mentioned in Section 3, during the training process, the teacher model also transfers its generalization ability to the student model. From Figs. 10a and 10b, we can conclude that the teacher’s convolutional filters are more similarly distributed to the student filters than the 

studentAlone filters, demonstrating the effectiveness of KD. 

4.4.3 Relationship between KD and model generalization 

From the previous experimental results, we discovered that the student_4M Inception model benefited the most from KD and demonstrated the highest performance improvement over the studentAlone_4M Inception model. Since the student_4M model leverages knowledge from the pre-trained teacher Inception model, we hypothesize that it possesses superior generalization ability on unseen time series data. To validate this hypothesis, we compare the training and validation loss curves for stu-dent_4M and studentAlone_4M models on the EOGVerticalSignal dataset, as shown in 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 19 of 24 215  

> Fig. 11 Generalization comparison between student_4M and studentAlone_4M

Fig. 11. To ensure a fair comparison, we consider only classification loss for the student_4M 

model, excluding the distillation loss. Since the UCR archive does not provide separate val-idation data, we use test set to monitor generalization behavior during training. Thus, the validation loss is computed based on the test data. Figure 11 reveals two key observations. First, the validation loss of the student_4M model converges to a considerably lower value than that of the studentAlone_4M model. Second, the generalization gap of the student_4M is approximately half that of the studentAlone_4M 

model. Notably, the studentAlone_4M model exhibits clear overfitting behavior. While the training loss of the studentAlone_4M model continues to decrease, the validation loss plateaus and slightly increases after approximately 200 epochs. In contrast, the student_4M model shows consistent convergence of both training and validation losses without overfitting. These results suggest that knowledge distillation acts as an effective regularization mechanism. The soft targets from teacher model encode richer information about inter-class relationships and prediction uncertainty, helping the student model learn more generalizable representations. This improved generalization directly explains the 3.6% higher test accuracy of the stu-dent_4M model compared to the studentAlone_4M model on the EOGVerticalSignal dataset. 

## 5 Conclusion and future works 

In this paper, we examined the impact of KD on three architectures by reducing the num-ber of convolutional filters (FCN), Inception modules (Inception) and attention heads with 

# 123 215 Page 20 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

embedding dimensions (ConvTran). The experiments were conducted on 112 datasets from the UCR Archive 2018, the largest repository of time series data available. Our results show that KD significantly improves performance of student models with intermediate complexity across all three architectures, consistent with findings in [29] for image classification. For FCN, the student_20F model reduces parameters by a factor of 38 while maintaining com-petitive performance. For Inception, the student_4M model achieves two more wins than the teacher with 42% fewer parameters, standing out as a highly efficient alternative. For ConvTran, the student_2H model benefits the most from KD with 20 more wins than the 

studentAlone_2H model. Notably, KD continues to improve ConvTran performance even for the smallest student configurations, unlike FCN and Inception where very small students fail to benefit from distillation. We also observed that distilled student convolutional filters are more similar to teacher filters than those of the studentAlone model, and that KD leads to better generalization. Although KD is typically evaluated on a few datasets in image classifi-cation, our evaluation across 112 datasets shows that finding an appropriate architecture for all datasets is not straightforward. Our study focuses on establishing a large-scale baseline for response-based KD on UCR benchmarks. As future work, we plan to investigate time series-aware distillation strategies such as alignment-based (soft-DTW-style) losses between teacher and student temporal feature sequences .

Acknowledgements This work was supported by the ANR DELEGATION project (grant ANR-21-CE23-0014) of the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche. The authors would like to acknowledge the High Performance Computing Center of the University of Strasbourg for supporting this work by providing scientific support and access to computing resources. Part of the computing resources were funded by the Equipex Equip@Meso project (Programme Investissements d’Avenir) and the CPER Alsacalcul/Big Data. The authors would also like to thank the creators and providers of the UCR Archive. 

Author Contributions J.A. conceptualized the study, designed the methodology, and conducted the experi-ments. M.D. contributed to the experimental design, data analysis, and interpretation of results. M.D., G.F. and J.W. supervised the research, provided critical feedback, and contributed to manuscript refinement. J.A. wrote the main manuscript, with M.D., G.F. and J.W. assisting in revisions and additional sections. All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript. 

Funding Open access funding provided by Université de Haute-Alsace. 

Data Availability For our experiments we have used open source UCR time series classification archive which is the largest time series classification repository. The link for the data: https://www.timeseriesclassification.com/ 

## Declarations 

Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 21 of 24 215 

## References 

1. Ay E, Devanne M, Weber J, Forestier G (2022) A study of knowledge distillation in fully convolutional network for time series classification. International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) 2. Bagnall A, Lines J, Hills J, Bostrom A (2015) Time-series classification with cote: the collective of transformation-based ensembles. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 270(9):2522–2535 3. Bagnall A, Lines J, Bostrom A, Large J, Keogh E (2017) The great time series classification bake off: a review and experimental evaluation of recent algorithmic advances. Data Min Knowl Disc 31:606–660 4. Baldán FJ, Benítez JM (2021) Multivariate times series classification through an interpretable represen-tation. Inf Sci 569:596–614 5. Bengio Y, Courville A, Vincent P (2013) Representation learning: a review and new perspectives. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 350(8):1798–1828 6. Bostrom A, Bagnall A (2015) Binary shapelet transform for multiclass time series classification. Inter-national Conference on Big Data Analytics and Knowledge Discovery 7. Buciluˇ a C, Caruana R, Niculescu-Mizil A (2006) Model compression. In: International conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining 8. Chelali M, Kurtz C, Puissant A, Vincent N (2020) Spatio-temporal stability analysis in satellite image times series. In: International Conference on Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence (ICPRAI) 9. Dau HA, Bagnall A, Kamgar K, Yeh C-CM, Zhu Y, Gharghabi S, Ratanamahatana CA, Keogh E (2019) The ucr time series archive. IEEE/CAA J Automatica Sinica 60(6):1293–1305 10. Dempster A, Petitjean F, Webb GI (2020) Rocket: exceptionally fast and accurate time series classification using random convolutional kernels. Data Min Knowl Disc 340(5):1454–1495 11. Devanne M, Nguyen SM (2017) Multi-level motion analysis for physical exercises assessment in kinaes-thetic rehabilitation. In: International Conference on Humanoid Robotics (Humanoids) 12. Foumani NM, Tan CW, Webb GI, Salehi M (2023) Improving position encoding of transformers for multivariate time series classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16642 13. Gong X, Si Y-W, Tian Y, Lin C, Zhang X, Liu X (2022) Kdctime: Knowledge distillation with calibration on inceptiontime for time-series classification. Inf Sci 613:184–203 14. Gou J, Baosheng Yu, Maybank SJ, Tao D (2021) Knowledge distillation: a survey. Int J Comput Vision 129:1789–1819 15. Gu Y, Dong L, Wei F, Huang M (2024) Minillm: Knowledge distillation of large language models. The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations 16. Guo D, Yang D, Zhang H, Song J, Zhang R, Runxin X, Zhu Q, Ma S, Wang P, Bi X et al (2025) Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 17. Hinton G, Vinyals O, Dean J (2015) Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 18. Ibrahim ZM, Bean D, Searle T, Qian L, Honghan W, Shek A, Kraljevic Z, Galloway J, Norton S, Teo JTH et al (2021) A knowledge distillation ensemble framework for predicting short-and long-term hospi-talization outcomes from electronic health records data. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform 260(1):423–435 19. Ismail-Fawaz A, Devanne M, Berretti S, Weber J, Forestier G (2023) Lite: Light inception with boosting techniques for time series classification. In: 2023 IEEE 10th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), pages 1–10. IEEE 20. Fawaz HI, Forestier G, Weber J, Idoumghar L, Muller P-A (2019) Deep learning for time series classifi-cation: a review. Data Min Knowl Disc 330(4):917–963 21. Fawaz HI, Lucas B, Forestier G, Pelletier C, Schmidt DF, Weber J, Webb GI, Idoumghar L, Muller P-A, Petitjean F, Inceptiontime (2020) Finding alexnet for time series classification. Data Min Knowl Disc 340(6):1936–1962 22. Kate RJ (2016) Using dynamic time warping distances as features for improved time series classification. Data Min Knowl Disc 30:283–312 23. Kowsar Y, Moshtaghi M, Velloso E, Bezdek JC, Kulik L, Leckie C (2022) Shape-sphere: A metric space for analysing time series by their shape. Inf Sci 582:198–214 24. Li H (2021) Time works well: Dynamic time warping based on time weighting for time series data mining. Inf Sci 547:592–608 25. Li H, Liu J, Yang Z, Liu RW, Kefeng W, Wan Y (2020) Adaptively constrained dynamic time warping for time series classification and clustering. Inf Sci 534:97–116 26. Lines J, Bagnall A (2015) Time series classification with ensembles of elastic distance measures. Data Min Knowl Disc 29:565–592 27. Lines J, Taylor S, Bagnall A (2016) Hive-cote: The hierarchical vote collective of transformation-based ensembles for time series classification. International conference on data mining (ICDM) 

# 123 215 Page 22 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

28. Mauceri S, Sweeney J, McDermott J (2020) Dissimilarity-based representations for one-class classifica-tion on time series. Pattern Recogn 100:107122 29. Mirzadeh SI, Farajtabar M, Li A, Levine N, Matsukawa A, Ghasemzadeh H (2020) Improved knowledge distillation via teacher assistant. In: International conference on artificial intelligence (AAAI) 30. Nguyen H-L, Ng W-K, Woon Y-K (2014) Closed motifs for streaming time series classification. Knowl Inf Syst 410(1):101–125 31. Oki H, Abe M, Miyao J, Kurita T (2020) Triplet loss for knowledge distillation. International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) 32. Petitjean F, Forestier G, Webb GI, Nicholson AE, Chen Y, Keogh E (2016) Faster and more accurate classification of time series by exploiting a novel dynamic time warping averaging algorithm. Knowl Inf Syst 47:1–26 33. Rajkomar A, Oren E, Chen K, Dai AM, Hajaj N, Hardt M, Liu PJ, Liu X, Marcus J, Sun M et al (2018) Scalable and accurate deep learning with electronic health records. NPJ digital medicine 10(1):18 34. Romero A, Ballas N, Kahou SE, Chassang A, Gatta C, Bengio Y (2014) Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6550 35. Schäfer P (2015) The boss is concerned with time series classification in the presence of noise. Data Min Knowl Disc 29:1505–1530 36. Shakeri S, Sethy A, Cheng C (2019) Knowledge distillation in document retrieval arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.11065 37. Sun S, Cheng Yu, Gan Z, Liu J (2019) Patient knowledge distillation for bert model compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09355 38. Takashima R, Li S, Kawai H (2018) An investigation of a knowledge distillation method for ctc acoustic models. In: International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) 39. Terefe T, Devanne M, Weber J, Hailemariam D, Forestier G (2023) Estimating time series averages from latent space of multi-tasking neural networks. Knowl Inf Syst 650(11):4967–5004. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s10115-023-01981-9 40. Wang H, Zhang Q, Jia W, Pan S, Chen Y (2019) Time series feature learning with labeled and unlabeled data. Pattern Recogn 89:55–66 41. Wang Z, Yan W, Oates T (2017) Time series classification from scratch with deep neural networks: A strong baseline. International joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN) 42. Wang Z-R, Du J (2021) Joint architecture and knowledge distillation in cnn for chinese text recognition. Pattern Recogn 111:0–107722 43. Qing X, Chen Z, Ragab M, Wang C, Min W, Li X (2022) Contrastive adversarial knowledge distillation for deep model compression in time-series regression tasks. Neurocomputing 485:242–251 44. Ting-Bing X, Yang P, Zhang X-Y, Liu C-L (2019) Lightweightnet: Toward fast and lightweight convolu-tional neural networks via architecture distillation. Pattern Recogn 88:272–284 45. Xiaohan X, Li M, Tao C, Shen T, Cheng R, Li J, Can X, Tao D, Zhou T (2024) A survey on knowledge distillation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13116 46. Zhijian X, Zeng A, Qiang X (2023) Fits: Modeling time series with 10 k parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03756 47. Yang Q, Xindong W (2006) 10 challenging problems in data mining research. Int J Inf Technol Decis Making 50(04):597–604 48. Yim J, Joo D, Bae J, Kim J (2017) A gift from knowledge distillation: Fast optimization, network min-imization and transfer learning. In International conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR) 49. Zeng A, Chen M, Zhang L, Qiang X (2023) Are transformers effective for time series forecasting? In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence 37:11121–11128 50. Zhang Y, Hou Y, OuYang K, Zhou S (2022) Multi-scale signed recurrence plot based time series classi-fication using inception architectural networks. Pattern Recogn 123:108385 

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. 

# 123 Enhancing deep learning models for time series classification… Page 23 of 24 215 

Javidan Abdullayev is a Ph.D. candidate in Computer Science at the University of Haute-Alsace, France, affiliated with the IRIMAS insti-tute. His research focuses on deep learning for time-series analysis and classification with particular interest in model compression and domain adaptation. He has worked on improving the efficiency and robustness of neural network models for time-series classification tasks. 

Maxime Devanne is Associate Professor (with habilitation) at Univer-sité Haute-Alsace in the IRIMAS Lab. His main research interests are computer vision, data mining and deep learning, with applications in time-series classification, human behavior and motion understanding. 

Jonathan Weber obtained his PhD in Computer Science in 2011 at Uni-versity of Strasbourg and became assistant professor at Université de Lorraine in 2012; he moved to Université de Haute-Alsace as associate professor in 2016. Since 2023, he is full professor at Université Haute-Alsace in the IRIMAS Lab. His main research interests are computer vision, data mining, time-series classification and deep learning, with various application fields. 

# 123 215 Page 24 of 24 J. Abdullayev et al. 

Germain Forestier received his PhD in Computer Science from the Uni-versity of Strasbourg in 2010, followed by a postdoctoral fellowship at INRIA Rennes and INSERM. He joined the University of Haute-Alsace as an Associate Professor in 2011 and has been a Full Professor since 2018. He is also an Adjunct Professor at Monash University (Australia). His research focuses on data science, data mining, time-series analysis, machine learning, big data, artificial intelligence and deep learning. 

# 123